Template Food
Control Plan
Simply Safe
& Suitable
You can use this template if you are a:

•   food retail business that prepares or makes and
    sells food – such as a butcher, fishmonger, retail
    baker, deli or supermarket,
•   food service business, such as restaurant, café,
    takeaway or on- or off-site caterer,
•   operator of residential care facilities including
    hospitals, hospices, rest homes, prisons, and
    educational facilities.

This is a legal document.
You must not add any procedures to this plan.



                                                         S39-00005
                                                         August 2025
                                                                        Setting up


Day cycle
The template format is based around the activities happening during the working day
from opening until it is time to close. The diagram below represents this.




                                          Startingg
                                           [blue]




               Closing
               [purple]

                                                                 Preparing
                                   Troubleshooting applies        [green]
                                        to all stages
                                            [red]




                Serving + Selling
                    [orange]
                                                Making + Cooking
                                                   [magenta]




Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Day cycle                                                2
                                                                 Setting up


Contents
Dark Blue Cards: Setting up             42    Keeping food cold
02      Day cycle
                                        Magenta Cards: Making + Cooking
05      Instructions
                                        44    Thoroughly cooking food
07      Business details
                                        46    Cooking poultry, minced
10      Business layout                       meat and liver
13      Understanding and managing      48    Proving the method you use
        risks from nearby activities          works every time
14      Taking responsibility           50    Reheating food
18      Checking the plan is            52    Cooling freshly cooked food
        working well
                                        55    Defrosting food
21      Training and competency
                                        56    Using water activity to control
23      Managing places and                   bugs
        equipment
                                        59    Using acid to control bugs
25      Managing water supply
        provided by a registered        61    Hot-smoking to control bugs
        drinking water supplier
                                        Orange Cards: Serving + Selling
27      Managing self-supply water
                                        64    Keeping food hot
Blue Cards: Starting                    66    Transporting food
30      Managing personal hygiene       68    Displaying food and customers
        and health                            serving themselves
33      Checking for pests              70    Knowing what is in your food
                                        72    Packaging and labelling
Green Cards: Preparing                        your food
34      Preparing food safely           75    Selling food to other
                                              businesses
36      Separating food
38      Sourcing, receiving and
        storing food


Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Contents                                           3
                                        Setting up


Contents
Purple Cards: Closing
77      Cleaning up and closing
80      Maintaining equipment
        and facilities

Red Cards: Troubleshooting

83      When something goes wrong
85      Dealing with customer 		
        complaints
87      Tracing your food
89      Recalling your food

Teal Cards: Specialist

92      Making sushi
95      Making Chinese style
        roast duck
97      Making doner kebabs
99      Cooking using sous vide
103     Preparing red meat for
        mincing and serving lightly-
        cooked or raw
107     Making biltong




Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Contents                4
                                                                            Setting up


Instructions
This is your Plan that you and your staff must read, follow and implement to ensure you
make and sell safe and suitable food.

How to use this Plan
Your plan sets out the steps you need to take to make safe and suitable food. You must
use it to identify risks and show how they are being managed. It means customers will
know your food is safe – and it can help you create a successful food business. Your plan
is divided into cards, which outline what you and your staff must do.

Each card has three sections: Know, Do and Show.

          Know has helpful information about why this topic is important to food safety
          and gives ideas for how you can comply with the rules in the Do section.

          Do contains the food safety rules you must follow.

          Show outlines what your verifier will ask you to demonstrate or the records
          they will expect to see.

Your plan only needs to contain the cards that apply to the foods and
drinks you make, and the processes you use to make and sell them.
You can remove any unnecessary cards. For example, if you do not make and sell sushi,
you can remove the 'Making sushi' [teal] card. If you are unsure about whether a section
applies to your business seek advice either from your verifier, registration authority, New
Zealand Food Safety (info@mpi.govt.nz), or a consultant.

Throughout your plan there are sections that you will need to fill in (e.g. 'My business
details' [dark blue], 'Taking Responsibility' [dark blue], 'Reheating food' [magenta]
cards).

To help you make sure that you are following the relevant rules, carrying out the
necessary checks , keeping the right records, and can find guidance, we have placed
icons throughout this document:
                                                            (orange shell icon)
          (pink pencil icon)
                                                            Information required for
          The records you must keep                         businesses handling shellfish

          (brown boat icon)                                 (black QR code icon)
          Information required for importers                Scan these for more guidance

Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Instructions                                                   5
                                                                            Setting up


Keeping records
Your records are one way of showing that you understand the rules and that everything
is running smoothly. They also provide evidence if there is a complaint or outbreak
of foodborne illness. New Zealand Food Safety has record blanks (i.e. 'forms' or
'templates'),which you can download and use, or you can make your own version of
these to better suit your business. Information can be recorded in different ways (e.g.
take a photo of your whiteboard and save it online).

If something goes wrong
Sometimes things go wrong, and your food might become unsafe or unsuitable. You and
your staff need to be able to identify what the problem is and be able to fix it. To prevent
it from happening again, you need a plan in place. Follow the 'When something goes
wrong' [red] card.

Getting verified
Your verifier will check how you follow your plan to make safe and suitable food when
they visit. You will need to have your plan available to show your verifier.

Storing your plan
You do not need a printed copy of this plan. You can use an electronic (for example a
PDF, or web page) version of this plan instead. This plan has web links to useful
information which will be easier to access if you use an electronic copy of the plan. All
staff must have easy access to the plan.




Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Instructions                                                   6
                                                                                         Setting up


Business details
Fill out your business details below

 Business details
Legal name
Trading name
Activity [tick as appropriate]
Food Service:       eat in    takeaway       on-site catering    off-site catering
   other [specify]:
Food Retail:     butcher     delicatessen      bakery      fishmonger       fresh produce
supermarket
  transport/delivery       mobile food service or retail    transport/logistics     importer
  other [specify]:
Postal address

Telephone
Email
 Location(s)
Street address (1)
(premises where
food business
operates)
Water supply

 Additional sites [continue on a separate sheet if needed and attach] List below any other premises
 that are used in connection with the food business (e.g. premises used for storage or preparation of
 food). These activities and sites will also be covered by your Plan. Note any activities will take place
 and the water supply source you will use for food purposes (see the 'Managing self-supply water' and '
 Managing water supply provided by a registered drinking water supplier').

Street address (2)


Activities/water
supply source
Street address (3)


Activities/water
supply source
Street address (4)


Activities/water
supply source
Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / My business details                                                            7
                                                                                         Setting up


 Operator: The operator is the owner or other person in control of the food business. If your Plan
 applies to more than one food business, the operator is the person(s) responsible for ensuring the
 Food Control Plan requirements are met at each food business.

Name
Physical address
(Business or
Residential)
Telephone
Email

 Operator of each food business (if plan applies to more than one food business). Add additional
 rows as necessary.
Name

Physical address
(Business or
Residential)
Telephone
Email

 Day-to-day manager [write ‘as above’ if the day-to-day manager is the operator] The day-to-day
 manager is the person who has the overall responsibility to make sure that the Food Control Plan is
 being followed and the appropriate checks and records are completed. The day-to-day manager's name
 and/or position needs to be stated here. It does not need to be repeated throughout the plan.

Name and/or
position

Telephone

 Registration authority (this will be your local council unless your Plan covers multiple premises in
 more than one council jurisdiction, then it will be MPI).

Registration             MPI      Council
authority              [Council name]:__________________________
Contact person

Address


Telephone

Email




Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / My business details                                                        8
                                                   Setting up


 Verifier (if not local council)

Verification agency



Contact person

Address

Telephone

Email




Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / My business details                9
                                                                            Setting up


Business layout
The design and physical location of your food business must allow you to make safe
and suitable food.

• To help you identify any potential or existing food safety hazards that need managing,
  follow the rules in the the 'Taking responsibility' [dark blue] card. You will need to
  produce an internal (inside) floor plan and an external (outside) map (these can be
  hand drawn, digital drawn or a photo) that includes:
    ◦   your building,
    ◦   the buildings surrounding it,
    ◦   what happens in the different areas on your map, including your food preparation
        areas (e.g. your kitchen),
    ◦   what happens in your buildings, including non-food activities,
    ◦   what happens in the different areas of the building,
    ◦   any non-food activities being conducted in the same or neighbouring buildings/
        property that might affect food safety,
    ◦   if using self-supply water, identify where the water comes from (e.g. roof/rain,
        bore or stream) and if is there are any treatment or storage locations on site.




Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Business layout                                               10
                                                                           Setting up


Layout — Inside of your business
This could be a hand drawn layout, a digital drawing, or a photo of the layout.




Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Business layout                                            11
                                                                       Setting up


Layout — Outside of your business
This could be a hand drawn map, digital drawing, or photo from above
(e.g. Google maps image).




Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Business layout                                        12
                                                                                        Setting up


Understanding and managing risks from near-by
activities
Sometimes the activities on neighbouring properties can affect how you and your staff
manage food safety and suitability in your business. Write down any activities happening
in your building, or neighbouring buildings/properties that might affect food safety or
suitability in your business, and how you and your staff manage these risks. Follow the
rules in the the 'Taking Responsibility' [dark blue] card for information on risks. If you
cannot identify any risks, then write 'none identified'.

               Risk to food safety                               How we manage the risk

 Example: Rubbish left out by a near-by food          Example: Keep windows/doors closed when
 business could attract pests (e.g. rats and          possible, and regularly check for pests (see
 mice), that could get into the building and          'Maintaining equipment and facilities' and
 contaminate food.                                    'Checking for pests' cards).




Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Understanding and managing risks from near-by activities                13
                                                                                      Setting up

                              Taking responsibility



                   Useful things to know
                   • You and your staff do not need to be food safety experts but do need to
                     know enough to make good food safety and suitability decisions. Following
Know                 this plan will help with these decisions and ensure your food is safe and
                     suitable.
                   • Food safety is about preventing food from causing illness or harm. Food can be
                     unsafe if it contains certain ‘hazards’. There are 3 types of hazards:
                     ◦1 Biological (bugs): Certain bugs (e.g. bacteria) can make people sick if they
                           are in or on food.
                     ◦2 Chemical: Many chemicals can make people sick if they are in or on food
                           (e.g cleaning chemicals).
                     ◦3 Physical (foreign): Glass, metal, plastic, or other sharp objects can
                           sometimes get into food and cause harm.
                   • Food suitability is about knowing your food meets customer expectations and
                     does not contain anything unexpected or offensive.
                   • It is your responsibility as the operator to make sure the food your business
                     produces, handles and/or sells is safe and suitable. You are responsible for
                     demonstrating food safety by leading by example.
                   • Taking responsibility for food safety means understanding the possible hazards
                     that could make your food unsafe and taking steps to:
                        ◦ keep bugs, harmful chemicals and foreign matter out,
                        ◦ reduce bugs to safe levels,
                        ◦ eliminate or remove bugs.
                   • Taking responsibility for food suitability means:
                        ◦ only using foods or ingredients that are appropriate for their intended use,
                        ◦ labelling food correctly,
                        ◦ making sure any claims about your food are true, and allowed.

                   Keeping customers safe
                   • Following the rules will help your business as:
                       ◦ about 86% of people that get sick from food do not report it- but they still
                          look for someone to blame,


       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Taking Responsibility                                           14
                                                                                       Setting up


                       ◦ about 75% of people do not think that they got sick from food they made
                         themselves, and blame someone that sold food to them,
                       ◦ most people believe it was one of the foods they last ate that made them
Know                     sick- when it actually could have been something they ate days or weeks
                         ago,
                       ◦ about 40% of people that get sick will not buy the food they blame for
                         making them sick again
                         (and might tell their friends not to buy it),
                       ◦ if someone reports sickness or other problem
                         (e.g. labelling, foreign matter) a Food Safety Officer investigates their
                         complaint- which means you
                         might be visited even if you did not make anyone sick.

                  Keeping records
                  • Keeping good records of how you and your staff have followed your plan and
                    checked that your practices are making safe food, will help you prove that your
                    food did not make people sick, and that your food is what you say it is.
                  • Some checks you make need to be recorded, and these are identified in the
                    Show sections of the plan. You may also choose to keep records for checks that
                    do not need to be recorded, this can help you keep track of how well you are
                    managing food safety and suitability.
                  • Without records it will be harder to prove you have been following your plan to
                    make safe and suitable food which could lead to:
                      ◦ recalling food,
                      ◦ stopping sale of food,
                      ◦ having to make certain improvements to your processes or practices,
                      ◦ fines or prosecution.
                  • All of the above can cost your business in time, money
                    or reputation.

                  Advice and guidance
                  • There is helpful guidance and tools available on the MPI website
                    (www.mpi.govt.nz/food-business/), these are all linked through
                    this plan.
                  • You can get advice and guidance from others, for example
                    verifiers, and consultants:
                      ◦ Verifiers can provide advice and coaching about following your plan
                         to make sure you have good practices in place, but they cannot make
                         decisions for you- it is your responsibility to make safe and suitable food.

       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Taking Responsibility                                               15
                                                                                         Setting up


                       ◦ Consultants can design systems, processes and procedures for you – but
                         cannot take away your responsibilities. It is part of their job to help you
                         understand how to make good decisions about food safety
Know                     and suitability – especially when things go wrong.. More
                         information on consultants can be found here: www.mpi.
                         govt.nz/food-business/starting-a-food-business/hiring-a-
                         food-consultant/


                   Rules you must follow
                   • Assign someone who is responsible for making sure your plan is followed: (tick
                     who is responsible for your plan)
 Do
                          day-to-day manager, or
                          delegated person's name and/or position:
                          __________________________________
                   • Always follow the Do and Show sections of your plan.
                   • Train staff so they are competent to make, serve and sell safe and suitable
                     food.
                   • Get verified within 6 weeks after registering. You must give your verifier access
                     to facilities and records they need to perform their duties.
                   • Keep a copy of all documents or records required for
                     at least 4 years.
                   • All records must:
                       ◦ be accurate,
                       ◦ easy to read,
                       ◦ identify what was done,
                       ◦ when it was done,
                       ◦ who did it.
                   • Provide all records to your verifier or registration authority (i.e. Council or MPI)
                     when requested.
                   • You must notify your registration authority (Council or MPI) of any change to
                     your business (e.g. change of business address) before making the change.


                   Things to show your verifier
                   • Your verifier might ask:
Show
                       ◦ whether you have given any food safety responsibilities to other people
                         (including contract processors) and, if so, how you know they are doing a
                         good job of keeping food safe and suitable,


       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Taking Responsibility                                              16
                                                                                 Setting up

                       ◦ whether there have been any changes to what you and your staff do, make
                         or sell since the last time they were there,
                       ◦ to see your records of the checks you and your staff have made.
Show




       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Taking Responsibility                                     17
                                                                                    Setting up
                             Checking the plan is
                             working well


                  What do you need to know?
                  • It is your responsibility as the operator of the plan to regularly check that
                    food safety and suitability is being well managed in your business.
Know
                  • You or one of your staff need to be your own internal verifier. This is someone
                    in your own business that checks that the plan is being followed correctly.

                  Why is self-verifying important?
                  • You are responsible for your business and the safety and suitability of
                    the food you make and sell. If you wait for someone else to tell you that
                    something has gone wrong, it may become costly and your food may make
                    people sick.
                  • Check your plan is working well by (for example):
                      ◦ checking that the rules are being followed and records are kept where
                        required (e.g. measuring the temperatures of food),
                      ◦ looking through records to check that your procedures are being
                        followed and your systems are working as expected,
                      ◦ reviewing the rules in the ‘When something goes wrong’ [red] card
                        and checking that steps have been taken to prevent problems from
                        happening again,
                      ◦ running food safety quizzes with staff,
                      ◦ using the ‘Show’ sections in this template to ask the same questions or
                        check the same things that your verifier would ask or look at,
                      ◦ testing the environment or foods for certain bugs or chemicals to show
                        procedures (e.g. cleaning and sanitising) are effective.
                  Some notes about testing:
                  • There are specific requirements for testing in some situations (e.g. self-supply
                    water).
                  • There are rules about certain limits for bugs or chemicals in
                    the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code (the Code)
                    www.foodstandards.govt.nz/code/Pages/default.aspx. A limit
                    does not mean you always have to test the food for that bug
                    or chemical.
                  • If you are thinking about using sampling and testing to show
                    your plan is working well, this should not be the only check that you do. It is

       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Checking the plan is working well                             18
                                                                                     Setting up


                    not possible to test your way to food safety. Testing can be used to support
                    and confirm the other checks being regularly made. It is not a substitute for
                    them, and you cannot rely on testing your way to food safety. Carrying out
Know                tests of the food environment can help, for example:
                       ◦ If testing results find harmful bugs, it might mean some part of your
                         process is not working well and you will need to follow the 'When
                         something goes wrong’ [red] card to work out what went wrong and
                         how you can stop it from happening again.
                       ◦ A negative result may not prove that your plan is working perfectly or
                         that the food is safe. Bugs are not usually evenly distributed in food, so
                         it is possible to test some food and get a negative result, when another
                         part of the food in the same batch has high levels of harmful bugs.
                  • If you use sampling and testing as part of your procedure for checking, it is
                    highly recommended that the testing plan is developed by an expert. If you
                    do not have an expert in your business, your verifier or a consultant can
                    provide information about putting together a sampling and testing plan.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • You must set up procedures for regularly checking that you and your staff
                    are making safe and suitable food and meeting your requirements and
 Do
                    responsibilities under the Food Act 2014.
                  • You must ensure:
                      ◦ that staff and people (e.g. delivery staff, suppliers) that come in contact
                        with food understand and can follow the rules in the Do sections of the
                        Plan and are following them,
                      ◦ the procedures you have put in place are being followed and are
                        effective,
                      ◦ your facilities and equipment remain suitable for the food activities at
                        your business,
                      ◦ that staff have the equipment and information to help them handle food
                        safely,
                      ◦ staff are committed to food safety. Staff who feel valued and committed
                        to food safety are much more likely to practice good food safety,
                      ◦ your scope of operations is up to date with your current business
                        activities (for example, if you are now selling frozen/chilled ready-to-eat
                        meals, then this plan is no longer suitable for you and you must contact
                        your registration authority).
                  • Follow the procedure on ‘When something goes wrong’ [red card] if your
                    sef-verification identifies mistakes or actions that could have made food
                    unsafe or unsuitable.

       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Checking the plan is working well                             19
                                                                                Setting up


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
                      ◦ how you check that your procedures are working well,
Show
                      ◦ records showing the results of the checks you have made when self-
                        verifying.




       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Checking the plan is working well                        20
                 v e r i fi e r
            ur                w                                                          Setting up
       Yo
                                  ill c
       e·                          h eck   Training and competency
         m
                              hi
                                  t
            s e v e r y ti




                        What do you need to know?
                        • People learn and understand in different ways. You need to know what ways
                          work best, to provide staff and visitors with the information they need to
Know
                          keep food safe and suitable.
                        • Staff could include owner/operators, managers, volunteers, family, and
                          friends who may carry out food related tasks in your business. Visitors could
                          include food delivery people, maintenance personnel etc.
                        • Staff and visitors need enough knowledge to manage risks to food safety
                          and suitability.
                        • Not all staff and visitors need training in all things, but they need to know
                          how to keep food safe and suitable when doing their particular job.
                        • If you have staff you will need to train them:
                             ◦ before they start handling food,
                             ◦ before you introduce or change a procedure,
                             ◦ whenever you think you or your staff need it (e.g. after something has
                               gone wrong).
                        • If you are a sole operator you do not need to keep training records. Your
                          verifier will ensure you can meet all of the rules in your plan.
                        Why is training and competency important?
                        • People need to know what can affect safety and suitability and what to do if
                          they find something starting to go wrong.
                        • Not all of the things that affect food safety and suitability are ‘common
                          knowledge’ so it pays to be trained properly so you or your staff do not
                          accidentally get it wrong.
                        • You need to know that staff and visitors are practicing the training you have
                          provided.
                        • You can help people become confident in applying good practices that keep
                          food safe and suitable by:
                            ◦ showing them what to do, and supporting them while they practice getting
                              things right;
                            ◦ buddying them with an experienced person who checks they understand
                              and are following the plan before they work alone.


       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Training and competency                                           21
                                                                                    Setting up


                  • If you are the sole person in your business, then you can use online tools for
                    training (e.g. food safety courses) or seek help (e.g. from your verifier or a
                    consultant).
Know
                  What do you need to do?
                  • The day-to-day manager or delegated person's name and/or position:
                    _______________________
 Do                 (tick who is responsible for your plan) ensure that all staff and visitors know
                    what to do to meet the relevant requirements in your plan for:
                       ◦ health and hygiene,
                       ◦ dealing with high risk foods that could make people sick,
                       ◦ cleaning and sanitising,
                       ◦ safely sourcing and receiving food,
                       ◦ keeping foods separate in the food preparation area (including, managing
                         allergens, keeping raw/uncooked food away from cooked food, and
                         managing chemicals and poisons),
                       ◦ other procedures which are specific to your food business,
                       ◦ managing customer complaints,
                       ◦ what to do when something goes wrong,
                       ◦ managing food recalls.
                  • Check that staff apply training:
                       ◦ before they start working in your food business,
                       ◦ when a procedure is introduced or changed.
                  • Keep a record of training that you, your staff or visitors have completed, and
                    when they completed it.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
                      ◦ How you know that staff and visitors were competent to do the job they
Show
                        were tasked with.
                      ◦ A record of how and when staff were trained to follow the plan. Include:
                          • who was trained,
                          • when they were trained,
                          • what parts of the plan you covered,
                          • signatures from the trainer and trainee.



       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Training and competency                                      22
                                                                                   Setting up
                            Managing places
                            and equipment


                  What do you need to know?
                  • When choosing places and equipment for your business there are some things
                    you should consider, like:
Know
                      ◦ what the place has been previously used for,
                      ◦ that rooms and equipment can be easily cleaned and maintained,
                      ◦ that there is adequate lighting, ventilation and services (e.g. water and
                        electricity),
                      ◦ that equipment is designed for food use and for the process you are
                        intending to use it for.
                  Why is choosing good places and equipment important?
                  • Places and equipment are the foundation of your business, and the choices you
                    make determine how hard you and your staff will have to work to know your
                    food is always safe and suitable.
                  • It is easy to overlook things that can result in food being contaminated and
                    people getting sick. For example:
                       ◦ holes in building cladding that could let vermin (rats, mice) get in and
                          contaminate food,
                       ◦ equipment that cannot be cleaned easily, and allows bugs to grow and
                          contaminate food,
                       ◦ buildings constructed from materials that could be a source of bugs,
                          chemicals or foreign matter getting into your food.
                  • It is best to source equipment especially designed for food use and for the
                    process you are intending to use it for.
                  • If using measuring equipment you will need to make sure that it
                    can take accurate measurements. A way you can make sure your
                    equipment is accurate is by calibration. An example of how to
                    calibrate a thermometer can be found here: https://www.mpi.
                    govt.nz/dmsdocument/31407-Thermometer-calibration-guidance
                  • It is best to choose places and equipment that enable you to manage food
                    safety and suitability hazards appropriately.

                  What do you need to do?
                  • Manage any food safety or suitability hazards associated with places and
                    equipment.
 Do
       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing places and equipment                               23
                                                                                    Setting up

                  • Check previous use of land and buildings, and only use areas that will allow you
                    to make safe and sell suitable food.
                  • If your neighbours do things that could cause your food to be unsafe or
Do                  unsuitable, work out how to minimise the chance that this could happen.
                  • Only operate out of places that have enough space to accommodate the
                    number of staff you plan to have working there, and allow for a good workflow.
                  • Design your workflow so food can move safely through your business (for
                    example, design it so that you do not carry raw chicken through areas where
                    cooked/ready-to-eat food is being handled).
                  • Buildings, fittings, fixtures or equipment must be made of materials that will
                    not be a source of bugs, chemicals or foreign matter getting into your food
                    where possible, or work out how to minimise or eliminate the chance that food
                    could become contaminated from these sources.
                  • Ensure all areas where food will be processed or stored can be easily cleaned
                    and sanitised (when appropriate).
                  • Limit the amount of dust, dirt, fumes or pests that can get into buildings used
                    for handling, making or storing food.
                  • Provide places for storage of cleaning chemicals and maintenance compounds
                    away from food.
                  • Make places to wash hands available close to food handling areas.
                  • Provide for rubbish areas away from food processing/preparation areas.
                  • You must use equipment that is accurate and working properly for measuring
                    control points (e.g. thermometers for checking fridge/chiller temperatures or
                    equipment to measure the pH of sushi rice).
                  • Vending machines must be able to keep food safe (e.g. keep cold food at 5°C
                    or below).'

                  What do you need to show?
                  • Your verifier might ask:
                      ◦ how you know the location has not previously been used for something
Show
                        that will make food unsafe,
                      ◦ how you/your staff manage risks from activities of your neighbours,
                      ◦ why you chose the equipment you are using,
                      ◦ how you know the building, fixtures, fittings and equipment do not pose
                        hazards to the food.
                  • Your verifier will observe workflow and whether staff can easily work and
                    maintain good food safety practices.



       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing places and equipment                                 24
                              Managing water supply                                            Setting up

                              provided by a registered
                              drinking water supplier


                  What do you need to know?
                  • Water can carry harmful bugs and chemicals which can make people sick. You
                    must to only use safe uncontaminated water for food preparation.
Know
                  • 'Safe water' is water that will not make people sick or kill them.
                  • Water can become contaminated when being stored on-site and being
                    distributed around food premises.
                  • It is recommended that when you first turn on your taps for the day, you
                    flush them by filling a large cup with water and throwing it out. This is due to
                    the risk of heavy metals (e.g. lead, copper) increasing in your plumbing over
                    time.
                  • You need to have enough safe water available to ensure your food
                    preparation areas, utensils and equipment can be cleaned, and staff can
                    wash their hands when needed.
                  • If your registered drinking water supplier notifies you that your water is
                    unsafe, you will need to follow the advice they provide.
                  • If you have concerns about the safety of the water you are supplied, then you
                    should contact your registered drinking water supplier.
                  • A registered drinking water supplier is someone who owns or
                    operates a water supply and is responsible for making sure that
                    it is safe. Suppliers have until November 2025 to register with
                    Taumata Arowai. You can search for registered suppliers here:
                    www.taumataarowai.govt.nz/for-communities/public-register/


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Provide the name of your registered drinking water supplier (e.g. local
                    council).
 Do
                    Name of supplier:___________________________
                  • Always use water which is safe for food preparation, cleaning and washing
                    hands. If your registered water supplier advises the water is unsafe and does
                    not provide you with advice to follow, then you must:
                      ◦ not use it, or
                      ◦ boil it for at least 1 minute before use, or
                      ◦ disinfect it with chlorine before use, or


       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing water supply provided by registered drinking water supplier    25
                                                                                               Setting up


                      ◦ use another supply of water which you are sure is safe (e.g. bottled
                        water, or water from a registered water tanker).
                  • Always throw out any food which has been contaminated by unsafe water.
 Do               • Always clean and sanitise any food contact surfaces that have been
                    contaminated by unsafe water.
                  • Only use water tanks, pipes and taps that are connected to safe water
                    sources.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show                  ◦ a record of any maintenance you've done
                        (see the 'Maintaining equipment and facilities' [purple] card).




       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing water supply provided by registered drinking water supplier    26
                                                                                  Setting up

                             Managing self-supply water



                  What do you need to know?
                  • If you are using self-supplied water then you will need to ensure that it
                    is safe.
Know
                  • Water can carry harmful bugs and chemicals which can make people sick. You
                    need to only use safe water for food preparation.
                  • 'Safe water' is water that will not make people sick or kill them.
                  • Water can be contaminated when being stored on-site and being distributed
                    around food premises.
                  • You need to know what contaminants (e.g. dirt, stones, chemicals etc.) may
                    be in your water and what treatment will be needed to ensure that it
                    is safe.
                  • You need to have enough safe water available to ensure your food
                    preparation areas, utensils and equipment can be cleaned, and staff can
                    wash their hands when needed.
                  • You will need to know what nearby activities and naturally occurring
                    chemicals (e.g. nitrates for groundwater, or lead for roof water) could make
                    your water supply unsafe.
                  • Any water treatment equipment used will need to be maintained, see the
                    'Maintaining equipment and facilities' [purple] card.
                  • There is information on the MPI website about accredited labs.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Tick where you get your water from:
 Do                      roof water source
                         surface water source
                         ground water source
                  • Always use safe water for food preparation, cleaning and washing hands. If
                    your water supply becomes unsafe you must:
                      ◦ not use it, or
                      ◦ boil it for at least 1 minute before use, or
                      ◦ disinfect it with chlorine before use, or
                      ◦ use another source of water which you know is safe (e.g. bottled water).

       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing self-supply water                                 27
                                                                                     Setting up


                • Always throw out any food which has become contaminated by unsafe water.
                • Always clean and sanitise any food contact surfaces that have been
                  contaminated by unsafe water.
Do              • You or your staff must test your water:
                    ◦ before first use in your business, or
                    ◦ if you do not have any records of self-supplied water testing.
                • Your water must meet all of the limits in the table below:
                     Measurement                                  Criteria
                 Escherichia coli         Less than 1 cfu/g in any 100 ml sample**
                 Turbidity                Must not exceed 5 Nephelometric Turbidity Units
                 Chlorine                 Not less than 0.2mg/l (ppm) free available chlorine
                 (when chlorinated)       with a minimum of 30 minutes contact time
                 pH (when chlorinated) 6.5 – 8.0
                **Escherichia coli testing must be performed by an accredited lab.
                • If your water does not meet the requirements in the table above, it must be
                  treated before use. Tick which options you will use:
                       Filtration
                       Chlorination
                       UV disinfection
                       Other __________________________
                • You must retest water no later than 1 week after:
                     ◦ getting water from a new self-supplied source, or
                     ◦ knowing of a change to the environment or activities that may affect the
                       safety and suitability of water (e.g. an adverse event, such as flooding or an
                       earthquake).
                • You must maintain equipment that is used for water supply, see the
                  'Maintaining equipment and facilities' [purple] card.
                • You must clearly mark taps, tanks, and pipes that do not contain safe water.
                  These must not be used for food processing, hand washing and cleaning.
                • For surface water sources, and ground water sources, water intakes must be:
                     ◦ at least 10m away from livestock,
                     ◦ at least 50m away from potential sources of contamination including
                       silage stacks, offal pits, human and animal waste, potential chemical
                       stores and tanks (e.g. fuel tank).
                • You must identify any nearby activities and chemical hazards (including
                  naturally occurring) that could make your water supply unsafe, and control
                  these appropriately.

     Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing self-supply water                                       28
                                                                              Setting up


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier a record of:
Show                 ◦ your water test results,
                     ◦ a list of all nearby activities which might affect
                       the safety of your water.
                  • Show your verifier how you know your water treatment system is working
                    properly.
                  • Show your verifier any chemical hazards you have identified and how you
                    control these.




       Dark Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing self-supply water                                29
                                                                                     Starting
                             Managing personal
                             hygiene and health


                  What do you need to know?
                  • Personal hygiene and health is important because it helps prevent
                    contamination of food making it unsafe and unsuitable.
Know
                  • Ways to protect food from contamination from people include:
                       ◦ washing hands,
                       ◦ not working with food when sick with anything that causes vomiting,
                         diarrhoea or jaundice,
                       ◦ wearing clean clothes (e.g. aprons, hats and hairnets).
                  • Washing your hands helps to keep bugs out of the food preparation area.
                    Regular hand washing helps prevent contamination of your food.
                  • Sanitiser can be applied after hands have been thoroughly washed with
                    soapy water and dried. Sanitiser cannot be used as a replacement for
                    hand washing.
                  • You and your staff should seek medical advice if you/they:
                       ◦ have jaundice, or
                       ◦ have vomited or had diarrhoea 2 or more times in a day, or
                       ◦ have been sick with a tummy bug for more than 24 hours.
                  • Staff who have had a tummy bug should not work with food until 48 hours
                    after their symptoms (e.g. vomiting, diarrhoea) stop.
                  • If staff contaminate food due to sickness or poor hygiene, you may have to
                    throw it out or you may have to recall it. See ‘Recalling your food’ [red card].

                  Why is personal hygiene important?
                  • One of the most common ways bugs get into food is from people - mostly
                    from their hands.
                  • Regularly washing hands with soap and water for 20 seconds, rinsing and
                    then drying them properly (using paper towels, single use cloths, or an air
                    dryer) is one of the best and easiest ways to help prevent bugs getting into
                    your food.
                  • Uncovered cuts, sores and boils can spread bugs and make food unsafe and
                    unsuitable, especially if they are weeping or infected.
                  • People who wear gloves (whether to cover plasters, sores or for preference
                    when handling food) need to change their gloves after touching something

       Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing personal hygiene and health                               30
                                                                                    Starting


                    other than food (e.g their nose or a rubbish bin lid); and wash their hands
                    whenever they take dirty gloves off, and before they put clean gloves on.
                  • Harmful bugs can be transferred to food through a sick person’s faeces,
Know                vomit and other body fluids (e.g. blood and snot).
                  • Dirty clothing can contaminate food, surfaces and equipment.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Wash your hands in soapy water for 20 seconds then dry thoroughly using
 Do                 paper towels, single use cloths, or an air dryer.
                  • Always have soap and paper towels, single-use cloths or an air dryer by the
                    hand-washing sink.
                  • You must keep your hand-washing area clean.
                  • You and your staff must wash your hands:
                      ◦ when entering the food preparation areas,
                      ◦ before handling food,
                      ◦ between handling raw and cooked foods,
                      ◦ between handling foods that contain allergens and foods that do not
                         contain allergens,
                      ◦ between handling cleaning products or chemicals and food,
                      ◦ after coughing or sneezing,
                      ◦ after using the toilet,
                      ◦ after using your phone,
                      ◦ after taking out rubbish,
                      ◦ after touching something you think is dirty.
                  • You and your staff must manage any cuts, sores, or boils by: (tick what you
                    will do)
                         completely covering any cuts, sores or boils, or
                         not handling food if cuts, sores or boils are weeping or infected and
                         cannot be completely covered.
                  • Gloves must be changed after touching something other than food and
                    between touching raw and cooked ingredients/meals. Hands must be
                    washed whenever dirty gloves are taken off and before clean gloves are put
                    on.

                  Manage sick staff
                  • You or your staff must not work with food when you/they are sick with an
                    illness that can be passed on through food.

       Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing personal hygiene and health                               31
                                                                                     Starting


                  • Any staff or visitors who have vomited, had diarrhoea or jaundice in the 48
                    hours before entering your business, or who develop these symptoms when
                    on your premises, must immediately tell either the: (tick who is responsible
 Do
                    for your plan)
                         day-to-day manager, or
                         delegated person's name and/or position:
                         ___________________________________
                  • Staff must stay away from the food making area, until 48 hours after
                    symptoms have stopped.
                  • Staff that are sick may be able to complete tasks that do not involve them
                    entering food preparation areas or coming into direct contact with food.

                  Wear clean clothing when handling and preparing food
                  • Clean clothing (e.g. aprons, hats and hairnets etc.) must be worn before
                    handling food or entering food preparation areas (this applies to visitors too).
                  • You must ensure that staff either: (tick which one you and your staff will do):
                        wear their own clean clothing, or
                        wear clean clothing that the business supplies.
                  • Remove outer protective clothing (e.g. aprons etc.) before leaving the food
                    making area (e.g. to go to the toilet, outside etc.).


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Your verifier will wash their hands when they enter your business to check
                    that everything they need to wash their hands is there.
Show
                  • Your verifier will ask:
                      ◦ who is responsible for making sure your hand washing area is fully
                        stocked and cleaned,
                      ◦ how you know people are washing their hands when they should,
                      ◦ staff about when they wash their hands, and may ask them to show how
                        they wash their hands,
                      ◦ what happens if someone has a tummy bug or gets sick,
                      ◦ check that everyone who handles food puts on clean clothing/aprons at
                        the start of (or as required, during)each shift,
                      ◦ how you make sure clean clothing is worn,
                      ◦ questions about your rules around clean clothing or any issues you have
                        had with your rules.
                  • Show your verifier:
                      ◦ a written record of when staff were sick.
       Blue Card / S39-00005 / Managing personal hygiene and health                               32
                                                                                     Starting

                             Checking for pests



                  What do you need to know?
                  • Pests such as rats, mice and cockroaches can spread disease. They can do
                    this by picking up bugs from rubbish and transferring it to food, surfaces and
Know
                    equipment with their faeces and urine.
                  • Pesticides/chemicals used for controlling pests can make people sick if they
                    contaminate food.

                  What do you need to do?
                  • Check internal and external areas, including waste collection and storage
                    areas, daily for signs of pests. Empty traps, remove droppings and dead
 Do                 insects, throw out any affected food.
                  • Clean and sanitise any affected equipment and areas that come into contact
                    with food or packaging.
                  • You must manage and control pests by either:
                         employing a pest control specialist, or
                         managing these risks yourself.
                  • Use pesticides/chemicals in a way that will not contaminate food, equipment
                    or surfaces. Follow manufacturers instructions for storing, preparing and
                    using chemicals.
                  • Follow the procedure on what to do 'When something goes wrong' [red
                    card] if you find signs that a pest may be present in your food business.

                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show                  ◦ how you and your staff check for pests,
                      ◦ how you and your staff control pests and manage risks from them (e.g.
                        contaminated food or packaging).




       Blue Card / S39-00005 / Checking for pests                                                33
                                                                                    Preparation

                             Preparing food safely



                  What do you need to know?
                  • Harmful bugs from food and allergens can be spread by contaminated food,
                    dirt, hands, clothes and surfaces. A dirty or badly organised preparation
Know
                    space allows bugs to grow and spread quickly and easily.
                  • Many food complaints are related to finding foreign matter (e.g. dead pests,
                    sticking plaster/bandage in food. Foreign matter from people or pests that
                    gets into food causes reputational harm and may cause people to get sick.
                  • Keeping food at the right temperature prevents bugs from growing quickly.
                    You need to know how to keep food (including food in vending machines) at
                    the right temperature to prevent these bugs from growing.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Check surfaces and equipment are clean and sanitised before using them.
 Do
                  • Clean and sanitise your work areas as you go throughout your day.
                  • You must provide appropriate cleaning equipment and a place to store it.
                  • Implement ways to prevent foreign matter getting into food.
                  • Ensure that your process does not allow for contamination of food.
                  • Prepare food as per the manufacturer instructions, or follow the applicable
                    parts of this plan (e.g. if you are preparing chilled food, then you must follow
                    the rules in the ‘Keeping food cold’ [green] card).
                  • When preparing food, if it is left in the danger zone (5°C to 60°C), then you
                    and your staff must follow the 2 hour/4 hour rule:

                    Total time food is in the danger zone     What to do
                    (5°C to 60°C)

                     More than 4 hours                        Throw out

                     2 to 4 hours                             Serve, or heat to 75°C
                                                              Do not chill

                     0 to 2 hours                             Serve, or chill, or heat to 75°C



       Green Card / S39-00005 / Preparing food safely                                             34
                                                                               Preparation


                    Applies to foods, such as:


 Do

                     Soft or fresh          Vegetable soups      Curries             Meat
                       cheese



                      Fresh tofu              Egg sandwich    Non-acidified     Open sauces
                                                                  rice

                  • The danger zone is between 5°C to 60°C and this is when harmful bugs grow
                    quickly.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
                      ◦ how you and your staff clean as you go,
Show
                      ◦ how you and your staff keep foreign matter out of food,
                      ◦ how you and your staff check the temperature of your food.




       Green Card / S39-00005 / Preparing food safely                                         35
                 v e r i fi e r
            ur                w                                                         Preparation
       Yo
                                  ill c
       e·                          h eck   Separating food
        m
                              hi
                                  t
            s e v e r y ti




                         What do you need to know?
                         • Keeping raw/uncooked food away from cooked/ready-to-eat foods (e.g.
                           keeping raw chicken away from cooked food) will stop bugs spreading.
Know
                         • Keep food separate from chemicals (e.g. cleaning products).
                         • Some foods/ingredients could cause an allergic reaction. Keeping food that
                           does not contain allergens separate from foods containing the allergens listed
                           below will stop people getting sick and possibly dying.
                         • There are a number of common food allergens you need to know about.
                           These are: peanuts, crustacea, molluscs, fish, milk, egg, gluten, wheat,
                           soy, sesame, lupin, sulphites, almonds, Brazil nuts, cashews, hazelnuts,
                           macadamias, pecans, pine nuts, pistachios, walnuts.
                         • Know what allergens are in the food you sell (follow the rules in the the
                           'Knowing what is in your food' [orange] card) – you need to be able to
                           tell customers, using the required allergen name, if they ask or include this
                           information on the packaging. Follow the rules in the the 'Packaging and
                           labelling' [orange] card.
                         • Liquid (e.g. from defrosted food) can contain harmful bugs. If these juices
                           get onto other food and surfaces they can make people sick.
                         Why is separating food important?
                         • Accidental contamination of food is one of the most common reasons food
                           becomes unsafe.
                         • Separating food will stop people getting sick and possibly dying.
                         • Poisons and dangerous chemicals can make people sick if they get into food.
                         • Making all allergen-free foods before you make allergen-containing foods,
                           can add some extra protection.


                         What do you need to do?
                         • You and your staff must have a way to manage preparing:
 Do
                             ◦ raw and cooked/ready-to-eat foods, and
                             ◦ foods that contain the allergens listed in the Know, and foods that do not
                               contain those allergens.
                         • Tick the option that you and your staff use to manage the point above:


       Green Card / S39-00005 / Separating food                                                       36
                                                                                   Preparation


                         use different spaces and equipment (chopping boards, knives and
                         utensils), or
                          thoroughly clean and sanitise (if required) surfaces, boards, knives and
 Do                      other utensils between use, or
                         thoroughly clean and sanitise (if required) surfaces and equipment
                         between use and process at different times.
                  • Wash your hands (follow the rules in the 'Managing personal health and
                    hygiene' [light blue] card) and, if required, change protective clothing (e.g.
                    aprons) between handling:
                      ◦ raw and cooked/ready-to-eat, or
                      ◦ foods that contain the allergens listed in the Know, and foods that do not
                        contain those allergens, or
                      ◦ dangerous chemicals or poisons and food.
                  • Keep all products not intended for human consumption (e.g. pet food) away
                    from food and food preparation areas.
                  • Label poisons and dangerous chemicals clearly, store them away from food
                    and food equipment, and make sure food is protected when using them.
                  • Label and store all food that could cause an allergic reaction separately.
                  • Tell your customers which foods you make or sell contain allergens if asked.
                  • When transporting your food, separate:
                      ◦ raw and cooked/ready-to-eat, or
                      ◦ foods that contain the allergens listed in the Know, and foods that do not
                         contain those allergens.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Your verifier will ask you and your staff to explain how you/they know
                    whether the foods made or served contain allergens, and the required
Show
                    allergen name to describe them.
                  • Show your verifier that foods containing any of the allergens listed in the
                    Know, and poisons and dangerous chemicals are clearly labelled.
                  • Show or explain to your verifier how you separate:
                       ◦ raw and cooked/ready-to-eat products, or
                       ◦ foods that contain the allergens listed in the
                         Know, and foods that do not contain those allergens, or
                       ◦ dangerous chemicals or poisons and food.



       Green Card / S39-00005 / Separating food                                                      37
                                                                                  Preparation
                             Sourcing, receiving
                             and storing food


                  What do you need to know?
                  • You need to know that the food you receive from a supplier or other source,
                    is safe and suitable.
Know
                  • You also need to know where the food has come from in case something
                    goes wrong.
                  • Some foods need to be kept cold (chilled or frozen)
                    to stop bugs growing.
                  • If you are receiving live shellfish then there are certain rules you need to
                    follow when receiving it, these are outlined in the Do section.
                  • If storing hot or cold food in vending machines, keep food at the correct
                    temperature to stop bugs from growing.
                  • Food or ingredients should not be used or sold after their ‘Use-
                    By' date (this includes food from vending machines). Guidance
                    on the use of 'Use-By' or 'Best Before' date marks can be found
                    here: www.mpi.govt.nz/food-safety-home/how-read-food-
                    labels/
                  • If you import food you will need to either register as a food importer with
                    MPI, or only purchase imported food from a registered food importer.
                  • If you are a registered importer, then the food you import will
                    need a safety and suitability assessment before being imported,
                    see mpi.govt.nz/safe-suitable-food/ for more information.

                  Why is sourcing and receiving important?
                  • Using trusted suppliers gives you confidence that the foods, and ingredients
                    you use are safe and suitable. This can prevent people getting sick from your
                    food, and save you time and money.
                  • Trusted suppliers could be businesses registered under the Food Act or
                    Animal Products Act. MPI have a register where you can look suppliers up:
                    www.mpi.govt.nz/food-business/food-safety-registers-lists/
                  • It is best to be at your business to receive deliveries. If chilled or
                    frozen food is delivered out of hours, you will need to know that
                    it was delivered at the right temperature, put away in the right
                    place (e.g. fridge or freezer) as agreed with your supplier, and
                    that it is still safe to use.

       Green Card / S39-00005 / Sourcing, receiving and storing food                            38
                                                                                 Preparation


                What do you need to do?
                • Only source food from trusted suppliers.
Do              • If you are importing food, you must register as a food importer with MPI, or
                  contract the services of one.
                • You must conduct a safety and suitability assessment of food before you
                  import it. See the Know section for more information.
                • When collecting or receiving food, you must check that:
                     ◦ cold food is cold,
                     ◦ frozen food is frozen,
                     ◦ packaging is not damaged or dirty,
                     ◦ food is not past its Use-By date.
                • If you are transporting food after collecting it, then you will need to follow
                  the 'Transporting food' [orange] card.
                • When receiving live shellfish, you must:
                     ◦ ensure it has been chilled to a temperature of 10ºC or less,
                     ◦ check that it does not contain foreign matter (e.g. mud and stones),
                     ◦ check with your supplier if it is safe to be consumed raw or lightly
                       cooked,
                     ◦ receive a harvest declaration.
                • If you receive shellfish direct from the harvester, you must receive and keep a
                  harvest declaration.
                • When receiving food, record:
                     ◦ the name and contact details of your supplier,
                     ◦ the type and quantity of food,
                     ◦ the temperature of the food, if it needs to be kept at a certain
                       temperature to make sure it is safe and suitable.
                • When receiving food check that it has sufficient information on the label
                  so that you can accurately use or label your food. Ask your supplier for
                  information about unlabelled products or for translations if imported.
                • Follow manufacturer's instructions for storing food.
                • Store food safely. Put chilled food away first, then frozen food, then food that
                  can be stored at room temperature.
                • Arrange your supplies so food with the soonest Use-By or Best Before dates is
                  used first.




     Green Card / S39-00005 / Sourcing, receiving and storing food                             39
                                                                                            Preparation


                  • Throw out food at its Use-By date.
                  • Store food covered and clearly labelled.
                  • If something goes wrong during the sourcing or receiving of food, follow the
 Do                 'When something goes wrong' [red] card.
                  • Follow the 2 hour/4-hour rule, as shown in the diagram below:

                     Total time food is in the danger zone             What to do
                     (5°C to 60°C)

                     More than 4 hours                                 Throw out

                     2 to 4 hours                                      Serve, or heat to 75°C
                                                                       Do not chill

                      0 to 2 hours                                     Serve, or chill, or heat to 75°C


                     Applies to foods, such as:




                     Soft or fresh          Vegetable soups                Curries                Meat
                       cheese



                      Fresh tofu              Egg sandwich              Non-acidified        Open sauces
                                                                            rice

                  • The danger zone is between 5°C to 60°C and this is when harmful bugs grow
                    quickly.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Your verifier will check:
Show
                      ◦ how you and your staff know that the food you receive is safe and
                        suitable,
                      ◦ records of your trusted supplier list and supplier assurances,




       Green Card / S39-00005 / Sourcing, receiving and storing food                                       40
                                                                                 Preparation


                      ◦ records of:
                          ◦ the name and contact details of your supplier,
                          ◦ the type and quantity of food,
Show
                          ◦ the temperature of the food, if it needs to be kept at a certain
                            temperature to make sure it is safe and suitable.
                  • Show your verifier how you and your staff store, label, and separate food
                    following your plan.




       Green Card / S39-00005 / Sourcing, receiving and storing food                            41
                                                                                 Preparation

                            Keeping food cold



                 What do you need to know?
                 • Keeping food at the right temperature prevents bugs from growing quickly.
Know             • Some foods must be kept cold (chilled or frozen) to stop bugs growing quickly.
                 • You and your staff need to know the difference between:
                     ◦ foods you need to keep cold to keep them safe (e.g. milk), and
                     ◦ foods you can keep cold so your customer enjoys them (e.g. beer).
                 • You and your staff need to know which foods must be kept cold. Ask your
                   supplier or follow manufacturer instructions.
                 • You need to make sure that temperature monitoring equipment (e.g.
                   thermometers) are accurate (i.e. calibrated). You cannot rely on the
                   temperature shown on your fridge/chiller.


                 What do you need to do?
                 • Check daily that the food in your fridge is being kept at 5⁰C or lower.
 Do
                 • Monitor the temperature of the food in your fridge by: (tick what you will do)
                       using a calibrated probe thermometer to check the temperature of food
                       or other substance
                       (e.g. a container of water), or
                       using a calibrated infrared thermometer to measure the surface
                       temperature of the food, or
                       using a calibrated automated system (e.g. bluetooth temperature
                       monitoring system) to monitor the internal temperature or surface
                       temperature of your food.
                 • Check that food in the freezer is still frozen. You do not have to record the
                   temperature of the frozen food.
                 • You and your staff must follow the 2 hour/4 hour rule for chilled food that has
                   been kept in the danger zone, as shown in the diagram below:




       Green Card / S39-00005 / Keeping food cold                                              42
                                                                                  Preparation


                    Total time food is in the danger zone    What to do
                    (5°C to 60°C)

 Do                 More than 4 hours                        Throw out

                     2 to 4 hours                            Serve, or heat to 75°C
                                                             Do not chill

                     0 to 2 hours                            Serve, or chill, or heat to 75°C


                    Applies to foods, such as:




                    Soft or fresh          Vegetable soups       Curries                Meat
                      cheese



                     Fresh tofu              Egg sandwich     Non-acidified        Open sauces
                                                                  rice


                  • The danger zone is between 5°C to 60°C and this is when harmful bugs grow
                    quickly.
                  • If something goes wrong with keeping food cold (e.g. food has started to
                    defrost in the freezer), then follow the 'When something goes wrong' [red]
                    card.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show
                      ◦ how you and your staff check the temperature of your food or the
                        internal temperature of your fridge(s),
                      ◦ a record of your temperature checks.




       Green Card / S39-00005 / Keeping food cold                                                43
                                                                              Making + Cooking

                            Thoroughly cooking food



                 What do you need to know?
                 • Some foods are likely to be contaminated with
                   bugs that will make people sick or die.
Know
                 • Cooking is a common way to kill these bugs and make the food safe to eat.
                 • Some foods need to be cooked thoroughly to kill bugs. You and your staff
                   need to know which of your foods are high risk and need to be cooked
                   thoroughly every time.
                 • Examples of food that needs to be cooked to be safe, includes poultry, minced
                   meats, and livers.
                 Why is thoroughly cooking food important?
                 • Thoroughly cooking kills bugs and makes your food safe to eat.
                 • It is important to check the temperature with a calibrated thermometer
                   because food can look cooked when it is not and look uncooked when it
                   is. It is important to use a calibrated thermometer to make sure that the
                   temperature is accurate.


                 What do you need to do?
                 • Cook poultry, minced meat (e.g.sauages, patties etc) and livers using the
                   ‘Cooking poultry, minced meat and liver’ [magenta] card.
 Do
                 • Meats such as beef, lamb and venison can be served rare but must be seared
                   before serving and being eaten straight away (i.e. in a restaurant/takeaway).
                 • Pork must be cooked to medium or well-done.
                 • If you and your staff are cooking using sous vide', or preparing red meat for
                   mincing and serving lightly cooked or raw, then you must follow the rules
                   on the relevant card(s).
                 • Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for cooking food.
                 • Always check dishes for cold spots. Food must be cooked evenly and all the
                   way through.
                 • Stir dishes frequently to avoid cold spots.
                 • Check the temperature of your food by: (tick what you will do)
                        using a calibrated probe thermometer to check the internal temperature
                        of the food, or


       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Thoroughly cooking food                                      44
                                                                               Making + Cooking


                        using a calibrated infrared thermometer to measure the surface
                        temperature of the food, or
                        using a calibrated automated system to monitor the internal
 Do                     temperature or surface temperature of your food (e.g. data logger).
                  • After thoroughly cooking food:
                      ◦ serve the food immediately,
                      ◦ keep the food hot (above 60⁰C) until it is served, follow the 'Keeping
                        food hot' [orange] card, or
                      ◦ rapidly cool the food following the rules in the ‘Cooling freshly cooked
                        food’ [magenta] card.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier how you and your staff know your food is always
                    thoroughly cooked by:
Show
                      ◦ taking the temperature of each item of food
                        you cook, and/or
                      ◦ using the manufacturer’s instructions.




       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Thoroughly cooking food                                          45
                                                                                Making + Cooking
                             Cooking poultry,
                             minced meat and liver


                  What do you need to know?
                  • Cooking foods thoroughly kills harmful bugs.
Know              • Mincing meats means that any bugs on the surface may be spread through
                    the product. Minced meat products need to be thoroughly cooked.
                  • You and your staff do not need to take the temperature of thinly sliced
                    poultry and livers or unformed minced meat (e.g. pieces of chicken in stir-fry,
                    sliced liver or ground minced meat).
                  • Livers can be contaminated with bad bugs both internally
                    and externally, so need to be thoroughly cooked. MPI have
                    developed guidelines to help with the safe cooking of livers:
                    www.mpi.govt.nz/food-business/food-safety-codes-standards/
                    good-operating-practice/documents/safe-cooking-of-livers/
                  • Cook poultry (e.g. chicken, duck, livers) and minced or finely
                    ground meat (e.g. sausages, meat patties) to specific temperatures for a set
                    amount of time to make sure they are safe.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Always use one of the following time/temperature combinations if you cook
                    poultry, minced or finely ground meat, or livers:
 Do
                  Internal temperature        Minimum time at temperature
                  65°C                        15 minutes
                  70°C                        3 minutes
                  75°C                        30 seconds
                  • Use a calibrated thermometer to check that the centre of the thickest part of
                    the poultry, minced meat or liver has reached one of the time/temperature
                    combinations above.
                  • You and your staff must either:
                      ◦ record the temperature of at least 1 item from each batch, every time
                        you make it, or
                      ◦ prove your cooking method works by following the 'Proving the method
                        you use works every time' [magenta] card.



       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Cooking poultry, minced meat and liver                         46
                                                                                Making + Cooking

                  • After cooking poultry, livers and minced meat:
                       ◦ serve the food immediately, or
                       ◦ keep the food hot (above 60⁰C) until it is served, follow the 'Keeping
 Do
                         food hot' [orange] card, or
                       ◦ rapidly cool the food following the rules in the ‘Cooling freshly cooked
                         food’ [magenta] card
                  • If you are reheating cooked poultry, livers, or minced meat, follow the
                    'Reheating food' [magenta] card.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier records of how you and your staff safely cook liver, poultry,
                    and minced meat. Record:
Show
                       ◦ the food
                       ◦ the date cooked,
                       ◦ the temperature the food was cooked to and how long it stayed at this
                         temperature.
                  • If you can prove your cooking method works, show your verifier records
                    required from the 'Proving the method you use to every time' [magenta]
                    card.




       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Cooking poultry, minced meat and liver                            47
                                                                              Making + Cooking
                            Proving the method you
                            use works every time


                 What do you need to know?
                 • Proving your method works means that you do not have to test every single
                   food item, each time you make it, and it gives you confidence that you are
Know
                   doing the right things to prevent or kill bugs.
                 • Once you have a proven method, you will not need to measure every item,
                   every time. Instead, you or your staff will need to check food made following
                   your proven method weekly to confirm your method still works.
                 • If you or your staff make or cook food following any of the cards below you
                   can prove your method works every time:
                      ◦ 'Cooking poultry, minced meat and liver' [magenta card],
                      ◦ 'Using water activity to control bugs' [magenta card],
                      ◦ 'Using acid to control bugs' [magenta card],
                      ◦ 'Hot-smoking to control bugs' [magenta card],
                      ◦ 'Making sushi' [teal card],
                      ◦ 'Making Chinese style roast duck' [teal card],
                      ◦ 'Cooking using sous vide' [teal card].
                 • If you or your staff cool freshly cooked food or reheat food, you can prove
                   your method works every time.


                 What do you need to do?
                 • Identify the methods you will prove: (tick which ones you and your staff will
                   prove)
 Do
                       'Cooking poultry, minced meat and liver' [magenta card]
                       'Using water activity to control bugs' [magenta card]
                       'Using acid to control bugs' [magenta card]
                       'Hot-smoking to control bugs' [magenta card]
                       'Making sushi' [teal card]
                       'Making Chinese style roast duck' [teal card]
                       'Cooking using sous vide' [teal card]
                      'Cooling freshly cooked food' [magenta card]
                       'Reheating food' [magenta card]

       Magenta Card / S39-00005 /                                                              48
                                                                                Making + Cooking


                 • You and your staff must use the same equipment, process and ingredients
                   (type, weight, size, vinegar solution etc.) for the method you are using every
                   time you make the food.
 Do              • Make or cook the food/cooking equipment using the standard procedure
                   from the relevant card.
                 • Check/test the food/cooking equipment to make sure it is meeting the
                   required limits (e.g. poultry and minced meat products are cooked to 75°C
                   for at least 30 seconds, the pH of acidified rice for sushi is between 4.3 and
                   3.0, water bath is at the correct temperature for sous vide).
                 • Check your method works 3 consecutive times with different batches of the
                   same food to prove that your controls are achieving safe and suitable food.
                   If any of your 3 checks shows that your method does not work, you must
                   redesign your method until you achieve 3 consecutive successful checks.
                 • Once proven you must check that your method still works by checking one
                   batch of the food weekly.


                 What do you need to show?
                 • Show your verifier how you and your staff have proven your method
                 • Show your verifier records of:
Show
                     ◦ your method,
                     ◦ your weekly batch checks.




       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Proving the method you use works every time                   49
                                                                               Making + Cooking

                            Reheating food



                 What do you need to know?
                 • You and your staff need to reheat food safely so that it does not stay in the
                   temperature danger zone (5°C to 60°C).
Know
                 • Vending machines need to reheat food safely.
                 • Bain-maries and hot cabinets do not reheat food. They keep food warm once
                   it has been cooked or reheated.
                 Why is reheating food important?
                 • If food is not reheated properly, it might stay in the temperature danger zone
                   (5°C to 60°C) too long and bad bugs might grow. This could make people sick
                   or die.


                 What do you need to do?
                 • Use the right equipment to reheat food quickly:
                   (tick which you and your staff use)
 Do
                        microwave
                        stovetop
                        oven
                        other ___________________________________
                 • Where provided, follow manufacturer instructions for reheating.
                 • Reheat food until steaming hot (at least 75°C) in the coolest part (if a liquid)
                   or the middle (if solid) and keep it above 60°C until it is used.
                 • Reheated food that has been held between 5°C and 60°Cfor up to 4 hours,
                   can be reheated again to above 75°C and served hot (above 60°C). If
                   reheated food has been held between 5°C and 60°C for more than 4 hours
                   then it must be thrown out.
                 • If reheating whole cuts of red meat or poultry that has been cooked using the
                   sous vide method, follow the 'Cooking using sous vide' [teal] card.
                 • Vending machines that reheat food must reheat it to at least 75°C or follow
                   manufacturer instructions. It must also keep the food above 60°C until used.
                 • If you and your staff regularly reheat your food, you can prove your method
                   so that you only need to check batches at a determined frequency. See the
                   ‘Proving the method you use works every time’ [magenta] card.


       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Reheating food                                                50
                                                                           Making + Cooking


                 What do you need to show?
                 • Show your verifier:
Show                 ◦ how you and your staff safely reheat food,
                     ◦ how you and your staff know your vending machine reheats food safely.




       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Reheating food                                           51
                                                                               Making + Cooking
                             Cooling freshly
                             cooked food


                  What do you need to know?
                  • You and your staff need to cool food correctly, so that it does not stay in the
                    temperature danger zone (5°C to 60°C) long enough for bugs to grow to
Know
                    unsafe levels.
                  • If hot food is added to your fridge too soon, then it could raise the
                    temperature of the rest of the food in your fridge and make it unsafe.
                  • Examples of food that needs to be cooled quickly includes: non-acidified rice,
                    soups, meat, meat pies, casseroles, curries, pasta dishes, quiches.
                  Why is cooling freshly cooked food important?
                  • If food is not cooled properly, it might stay in the temperature danger zone
                    (5°C to 60°C) too long allowing bad bugs to grow. This could make people sick
                    or die.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Cool food quickly to stop bugs growing or producing toxins.
 Do
                  • Food must go from:
                       ◦ 60°C to 5°C (or below) in less than 6 hours or it must be thrown out,
                       ◦ To achieve this you must cool the food from 60°C to 21°C or room
                         temperature (whichever is colder) in less than 2 hours. Then from 21°C
                         or room temperature (whichever is colder) to 5°C (or below) in less than
                         4 hours.
                  • This cooling process only starts when your food gets to 60°C . This is when
                    you start checking it.
                  • Once your food is at 21°C or room temperature (whichever is colder), put it
                    in the fridge or chiller.
                  • Check after 4 hours that food is at 5°C or below.
                  • Use any (or a combination) of these methods:
                    (tick what you and your staff use):
                         placing your food into shallow containers,
                         using an ice bath,
                         separating your food into smaller portions,
                         using cooling racks,
                         placing your food in a blast chiller.
       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Cooling freshly cooked food                                    52
                                                                                       Making + Cooking


                • If you and your staff regularly cool your food, you can prove your method
                  so that you only need to check batches at a determined frequency. See the
                  ‘Proving the method you use works every time’ [magenta] card
Do              • Follow the procedure on what to do 'When something goes wrong' [red]
                  card if food is not cooled safely within 6 hours.
                Cooling food
                Throw out if food is not cooled to 5°C within 6 hours
               1

                   Freshly
                                                                                60°C
                   cooked

                             Food cooking                     Food taken off heat

               2




                                                                                              6 hours (total) to get food from 60°C to 5°C
                          60°-C                                      21°C or room
                         Start timing                                temperature
                                                                 (whichever is colder)



                                                2 hours
                                                or less

                     Food cooled using
                   methods such as, an
                   ice bath, cooling rack                        Food placed in fridge
                      or shallow trays

               3
                             21°C                                    5°C or below
                                                                       Finish timing


                                                Another
                                                4 hours
                                                or less


                   Food placed in fridge                         Food cooling in fridge

                    This applies to foods such as:



                   Lasagne      Rice dishes       Soup            Quiches           Pies


     Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Cooling freshly cooked food                                                                                  53
                                                                              Making + Cooking


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show or describe to your verifier how you and your staff cool freshly cooked
                    food quickly.
Show
                  • Show your verifier records of how you and your staff safely cool each batch
                    of freshly cooked food (i.e. 60°C to 21°C or room temperature (whichever is
                    colder) in less than 2 hours, then 21°C or room temperature (whichever is
                    colder) to 5°C (or below) in less than 4 hours).
                  • Write down:
                       ◦ the food,
                       ◦ date the food was cooked,
                       ◦ the time it took to cool down.
                  • If you and your staff can prove your cooling method works, show your verifier
                    records required from the 'Proving the method you use to every time'
                    [magenta] card.




       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Cooling freshly cooked food                                 54
                                                                                Making + Cooking

                             Defrosting food



                  What do you need to know?
                  • If you leave food to thaw at room temperature for a long time, the outer
                    parts may be in the temperature danger zone (5°C-60°C) for too long before
Know
                    the middle thaws.
                  • Thawing food in the fridge ensures that it is not in the danger zone and is in
                    the best condition for use.
                  • If food is only partially defrosted, it may not reach the correct temperatures
                    during cooking to kill bugs.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Plan ahead if using frozen food so you have enough time to thaw it safely,
                    either in the fridge/chiller.
 Do
                  • When provided, thaw products according to manufacturer’s instructions.
                  • Clearly label food being defrosted (e.g. date defrosting started).
                  • Keep food that is being defrosted in a container and near the bottom of the
                    fridge/chiller to stop juices from spreading onto surfaces and other foods.
                  • If you cannot defrost food in a fridge/chiller, you can use any (or a
                    combination) of these methods:
                    (tick which you and your staff use)
                         thaw in the microwave and use food immediately,
                         thaw under running cold water in an air tight container,
                         defrost on the bench for no more than 4 hours.
                  • Once thawed, foods that are normally kept cold or hot must be either
                    refrigerated, cooked or kept hot.
                  • Food must be fully defrosted before being reheated
                    or cooked.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
                      ◦ how you and your staff defrost your food,
Show
                      ◦ how you and your staff keep defrosted food safe.


       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Defrosting food                                                 55
                                                                                Making + Cooking
                             Using water activity to
                             control bugs


                  What do you need to know?
                  • This procedure applies to people who concentrate and dry food.
Know
                  • Examples of food that can be dried using this card are: cooked and dried
                    meat products, dried fruits and vegetables (e.g. dried lemons, limes,
                    oranges).
                  • If you are making biltong, please refer to the ‘Making biltong’ [teal] card. Do
                    not use this card.
                  • Harmful bugs need moisture to grow. Lowering the moisture content (water
                    activity) of your food will help to stop their growth.
                  • Water activity relates to the amount of water that is available, to support
                    the growth of bugs, in your food. It is not the same as the overall moisture
                    content of a food as some moisture in food is not available for bugs to use for
                    growth.
                  • To lower water activity you need to reduce the moisture content to make it
                    harder for bugs to grow. This can be done by drying food, or adding salt or
                    sugar.
                  • A water activity of 0.85 or less is necessary if food is not intended to be
                    stored in the fridge, or have another preservation method (e.g. pH).
                  • Lowering the moisture content of food can also have the effect of raising the
                    salt or sugar concentration in foods - which can kill many bugs.
                  • It is important that the method you and your staff use for concentration
                    or drying results in water being removed evenly from the food. If there are
                    some spots with a higher water activity, bugs can still grow in these parts and
                    cause the food to become unsafe or unsuitable.
                  • Once the water activity of your food is below 0.85, it is important to protect
                    it from absorbing water from the air, or other foods during its shelf-life. This
                    can be done by:
                       ◦ using packaging that prevents moisture absorption, or
                       ◦ storing the food in a humidity controlled environment.
                  • If the water activity increases again, any bugs that are still alive can start
                    growing again, and cause the food to become unsafe or unsuitable.
                  • There are rules in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code (the Code)
                    about the types of food additives (e.g. preservatives) you can add to some
                    foods. See the Code or ask your verifier for more information.

       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Using water activity to control bugs                            56
                                                                                Making + Cooking


                  • You and your staff do not need to follow this card if you are following the
                    ‘Making Chinese-style roast duck’ [teal] card.

Know

                  What do you need to do?
                  Drying
 Do               • Dried products must have a water activity of 0.85 or less unless they are
                    either: (tick if one applies)
                         stored chilled at 5°C or below until it is used,
                         subject to other valid preservation methods
                         (e.g. reducing pH).
                  • All drying equipment (e.g. heating, fans, humidifiers) must be regularly
                    checked that they are working properly.
                  • I will dry my food: (tick where food is dried)
                          in a temperature-controlled space,
                          at ambient air temperatures.
                  • If you are drying food in the danger zone (5°C to 60°C) that usually requires
                    temperature control, then you must follow the 2 hour/4 hour rule. See the
                    'Preparing food safely' [green] card.
                  • If you are making products with a water activity of 0.85 or less, you must test
                    them to make sure they achieve this.
                  • If you and your staff have a proven method for drying your food to a water
                    activity of 0.85 or less, you must send 3 batches of your product to an
                    accredited lab for water activity testing. This must be done at least once
                    initially, and then you can use your own method to calculate water activity
                    (e.g. weight loss). See the ‘Proving the method you use works every time’
                    [magenta] card.

                  Brining and salting
                  • During immersion brining, meat must be fully immersed in the brine.
                  • Empty and clean brining tanks regularly (e.g. at the end of each batch).
                  • Check injection equipment before and after each use for any broken or
                    missing parts.
                  • Injectors must be clean before use.
                  • When salting, or rubbing salt, make sure the salt evenly covers the surface of
                    the food.



       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Using water activity to control bugs                            57
                                                                              Making + Cooking

                  Brining and salting solutions
                  • Only use permitted food additives. See the rules in the Code for the list of
                    food additives you can use.
 Do               • Make and use preparations following the manufacturer’s instructions, or with
                    own tried and tested recipes.
                  • Do not dilute the concentration of food additives
                    (e.g. nitrite) and salt necessary to achieve brining and salting.
                  • Stored chilled preparations at 5°C or below.
                    Keep them covered until use.
                  • Carry out brining and salting at 5°C or below.
                  • Throw out any recirculated or re-used preparations, and preparations which
                    may been contaminated such as those used in injecting, at the end of each
                    batch or day’s operation.

                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show
                      ◦ any laboratory test results or results from your own method (e.g. weight
                        loss) for water activity testing (if applicable),
                      ◦ how you and your staff safely dry or brine your food,
                      ◦ a record of the permitted food additives and how you are meeting the
                        rules in the Code.




       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Using water activity to control bugs                         58
                                                                                 Making + Cooking
                             Using acid to
                             control bugs



                  What do you need to know?
                  • If you and your staff ferment or acidify your food to make it safe, there are pH
                    rules you need to meet.
Know
                  • Acidification is when acid is added to food to stop or slow down the growth of
                    harmful bugs (e.g. pickling onions).
                  • Fermentation is when good bugs are purposefully grown in food to compete
                    against harmful bugs and slow them down.
                  • Examples of food that can be made using this card are: pickled vegetables, fruit
                    and meat; kombucha; kimchi; saurkraut; sauces etc;
                  • Many harmful bugs cannot grow or grow very slowly in acidic environments
                    (pH of 4.6 or less). Lowering the pH to less than 3.6 kill's most harmful bugs.
                  • You and your staff do not need to follow this card if you are following either of
                    these cards:
                       ◦ Making Chinese-style roast duck [teal card], or
                       ◦ Making sushi [teal card].
                  • You need to get the pH levels of your food right so you do not harm your
                    customers i.e. if the food is too acidic (pH less than 3.0) you could burn
                    someone's throat. If the food is not acidic enough (pH more than 4.6) too many
                    bad bugs can grow.
                  • It is important that the method you use to acidify food results in an even pH,
                    throughout the food, to prevent bugs growing.
                  • You might need to calculate the shelf-life of your acidified or fermented
                    product, follow the rules in the the 'Packaging and labelling your food'
                    [orange] card.
                  • You cannot make uncooked comminuted fermented meat (UCFM) products
                    (e.g. uncooked salami or chorizo) with this plan. You will need to register a
                    custom Food Control Plan, if you want to make these products. For more
                    information, see here: https://www.mpi.govt.nz/food-business/running-a-food-
                    business/food-control-plans/custom-food-control-plans/create-custom-food-
                    control-plan/
                  • If you wish to sell acidified or fermented products to other businesses (e.g.
                    sauces, kombucha etc), you will need to follow the rules in the ‘Selling food
                    to other businesses’ [orange] card.


       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Using acid to control bugs                                      59
                                                                               Making + Cooking


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Identify the foods that need to be fermented or acidified.
 Do
                  • If you and your staff are acidifying food, other than to provide flavour, you
                    must use a method that achieves a consistent pH.
                  • If you and your staff are fermenting food, you must use a method that allows
                    the good bugs to grow quickly, well and evenly throughout your food.
                  • Use one of these methods to measure pH: (tick which you and your staff will
                    do)
                          use a calibrated pH meter or
                          send samples to an accredited lab.
                  • The finished food product must have:
                       a. a pH throughout that must have stabilised at 3.6 or less, or
                       b.both:
                           i. a pH throughout that must have stabilised at between 3.6 and 4.6, and
                           ii. the product must have been subject to a pasteurisation process, or a
                               thorough cooking process
                  • If you want to sell acidified or fermented products to other businesses, then
                    you must follow the rules in the ‘Selling food to other businesses’
                    [orange] card.
                  • If you and your staff regularly acidify or ferment your products, you can
                    prove your method so that you only need to check batches at a determined
                    frequency. See the ‘Proving the method you use works every time’
                    [magenta] card.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show                  ◦ how you and your staff ferment or acidify your food,
                      ◦ how you and your staff know the pH is uniform and stable and is either:
                           • below 3.6, or
                           • between 3.6 and 4.6 if the finished food has been pasteurised or
                             thoroughly cooked.
                      ◦ if you and your staff are fermenting, how you know the fermentation is
                        working.




       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Using acid to control bugs                                     60
                                                                                     Making + Cooking

                             Hot-smoking to control bugs



                  What do you need to know?
                  • You can hot smoke your food to either cook it or add flavour to it. Depending
                    on what you are doing will determine what rules you need to follow in the Do
Know
                    section of this card.
                  • There are rules in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code (the Code)
                    about the types of food additives (e.g. preservatives) you can add to some
                    foods. See the Code or ask your verifier for more information.

                  Why is hot smoking to control bugs important?
                  • Hot smoking can help to stop bugs growing in your food but it may need
                    further processing or cold storage to make sure it is safe.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Choose why you are hot-smoking:
 Do                    hot-smoking to cook food,
                       hot-smoking to impart flavour.

                  Smoking seafood
                  • When hot-smoking seafood you must only use fresh seafood, or seafood that
                    was frozen when it was fresh.
                  • If hot-smoking is part of the cooking process for seafood products, it must be
                    cooked using one of the following time temperature combinations:
                                                                                               Other
                                                         Salmon/ oily
                    Internal temp        Mussels                         Hoki/lean fish    (e.g. shellfish,
                                                             fish
                                                                                             crustacea)
                   63°C              6 min             8.5 min          4.25 min          13 min
                   65°C              2.25 min          4.5 min          2.25 min          6 min
                   68°C              30 sec            2 min            1 min             2 min
                   70°C              5 sec             35 sec           10 sec            1.5 min
                   75°C              1 sec             5 sec            2 sec             15 sec




       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Hot-smoking to control bugs                                             61
                                                                                Making + Cooking

                  Smoking meat
                  • If hot-smoking is part of the cooking process for meat products, it must be
                    cooked to a temperature of 75°C for at least 30 seconds. Or an equivalent
 Do                 time temperature combination from the ‘Cooking poultry, minced meat and
                    chicken liver' [magenta] card.
                  • All smoking equipment (e.g. heating, air circulation, wood chips) must be safe
                    and working properly.
                  • Smoking must be carried out: (tick which one you and your staff will do)
                         in a temperature-controlled space,
                         with the smoking temperature manually controlled.
                  • The product must be spaced out evenly to help air circulation and even
                    smoking of your product.
                  • Follow manufacturer’s instructions when using liquid smoke.
                  • After your food has been smoked, food which must be kept cold must be
                    stored at or below 5°C and must either be (tick which you will do):
                         marked with the date and time it was smoked, and then either used, or
                         sold to be consumed, within 5 days of processing, or
                         given a 'Use-By’ date.
                  • For more information on date marking, follow the rules in the the 'Packaging
                    and labeling your food' [orange] card.
                  • For each batch of food you hot-smoke as part of the cooking process, you must
                    keep records, follow the rules in the the Show section.
                  • For each batch of food you hot-smoke to flavour, you must keep records, follow
                    the rules in the the Show section.
                  • If you and your staff are smoking for flavour, then you must follow the 2 hour/4
                    hour rule. Follow the rules in the the 'Preparing food safely' [green] card.
                  • If you and your staff are cooling the hot smoked food, then you must follow the
                    requirements on the 'Cooling freshly cooked food' [magenta] card.
                  • If you and your staff regularly hot-smoke your products, you can prove your
                    method so that you only need to check batches weekly. See the ‘Proving the
                    method you use works every time’ [magenta] card.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
                      ◦ how you and your staff safely hot smoke your food.
Show
                      ◦ If hot-smoking is part of the cooking process, how you know your food is
                        cooked, and a written record of:


       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Hot-smoking to control bugs                                    62
                                                                               Making + Cooking


                            • the smoke house/box air temperature,
                            • the smoking start time,
                            • the smoking finish time,
Show
                            • the core temperature of the food at the end of the cooking period,
                            • if additional time for cooking was required.
                       ◦ If hot-smoking to flavour your food, a written record of:
                            ◦ the smoke house/box air temperature,
                            ◦ the length of time of the smoking process.




       Magenta Card / S39-00005 / Hot-smoking to control bugs                                      63
                                                                                Serving + Selling

                                   Keeping food hot



                  What do you need to know?
                  • You need to keep foods that would normally be kept cold or hot out of the
                    temperature danger zone (5°C -60°C) to stop bugs from growing and making
Know
                    people sick.
                  • Hot food needs to be kept above 60°C to stop bugs growing.
                  • Once food has been cooked, if the intention is to keep it hot, it is important
                    to keep it out of the temperature danger zone where bugs can grow, until it is
                    either eaten or quickly cooled down.

                  What do you need to do?
                  • Follow manufacturers’ instructions for using equipment for keeping food hot
                    (eg: bain-marie or hot cabinet).
 Do
                  • Cook food following the rules in the 'Thoroughly cooking food' [magenta],
                    'Cooking poultry, minced meat and liver' [magenta] and 'Cooking using
                    sous vide' [teal] cards, before placing in hot holding equipment.
                  • Reheat food following the 'Reheating food' [magenta] card, before placing in
                    the hot holding equipment (e.g. bain-marie or hot cabinet).
                  • Your equipment must keep food above 60°C. Use a calibrated thermometer
                    to check the temperature of the food.
                  • Stir liquid food to ensure it is hot all the way through with no cold spots.
                  • When food is being kept hot for more than 2 hours, check the temperature
                    every 2 hours so you are sure it is above 60°C.
                  • If the 2 hour check shows that the food temperature has dropped below
                    60°C, reheat food to above 75°C and increase the temperature of the bain-
                    marie or hot cabinet (following the Reheating food' [magenta] card). If food
                    is below 60°C at the next check, throw it out.
                  • Hot food that has been held at less than 60°C for more than 4 hours, must be
                    thrown away.
                  • Hot food that has been held at less than 60°C for less than 2 hours, can either
                    be:
                       ◦ thoroughly reheated and served hot (above 60°C),or
                       ◦ quickly cooled to below 21°C, following the 'Cooling freshly cooked food'
                         [magenta] card.
                  • Do not mix old and new batches of reheated or hot, ready-to-eat food.
       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Keeping food hot                                               64
                                                                              Serving + Selling


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show                  ◦ how you and your staff keep food hot,
                      ◦ how you and your staff measure temperature,
                      ◦ how you know you and your staff are checking temperatures in the
                        required time limits,
                      ◦ what you do if you find the temperature of hot food is below 60°C.




       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Keeping food hot                                             65
                                                                               Serving + Selling

                             Transporting food



                  What do you need to know?
                  • When transporting food that would normally be kept cold or hot, you need to
                    take steps to keep the food out
Know
                    of the temperature danger zone (5°C to 60°C) to stop bugs growing. Follow
                    the rules in the the 'Keeping food cold' [green] and/or 'Keeping food hot'
                    [orange] cards
                  • While food is being transported, the vehicle it is being transported in should
                    be considered a food premises - keep it clean and separate food as you would
                    in a kitchen or store room.
                  • If you are contracting someone else to transport food, you need to make
                    sure that they will transport it safely (e.g. within the appropriate time/
                    temperature parameters).
                  • If you are using a delivery service (e.g. an online food ordering and delivery
                    company) to deliver your food, you and your staff are still responsible for
                    ensuring your food is safe and suitable when it arrives.
                  • Food and non-food goods (e.g. chemicals) need to be kept separate to
                    prevent food becoming contaminated or tainted.
                  • The requirements in this card apply to all businesses using this plan, that
                    transport chilled/frozen/ambient food.

                  Why is it important to transport food safely?
                  • During transport, food can become unsafe and unsuitable as it can get
                    damaged, contaminated, or have temperature fluctuations.


                  What do you need to do?
                  Keeping hot food hot, and cold food cold
Do                • Food must be transported and delivered at the correct temperature.
                  • Transport cold food cold (at or below 5°C) or hot food hot (above 60°C). You
                    must regularly check this.
                  • Keep frozen food frozen so it is hard/solid.
                  • Use appropriate equipment for transporting food so you know your food will
                    arrive at the correct temperature: (tick which ones you and your staff use)
                         insulated bags/boxes,

       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Transporting food                                             66
                                                                               Serving + Selling


                         portable chillers,
                         hot-holding equipment,
                         other__________________________
 Do
                  Plan before transporting
                  • You must manage anything that could cause contamination (e.g. animals kept
                    out of parts of vehicle used for food, chemicals kept away from food).
                  • All parts of the vehicle that you use to transport food or food equipment
                    must be clean and sanitised if going to be in direct contact with ready-to-eat
                    food (e.g. trays of bread loaves or whole fruits).
                  • Throw out:
                      ◦ any food that has become contaminated,
                      ◦ food that has been kept in the danger zone
                         for more than 4 hours.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show                  ◦ how you and your staff make sure food is kept at the correct temperature
                        when being transported,
                      ◦ what method you and your staff use to maintain temperatures and keep
                        foods separate while transporting food,
                      ◦ your vehicle used for transporting food,
                      ◦ how you and your staff know your food is being kept safe and suitable
                        when being delivered by a third party,
                      ◦ a record of the temperature your chilled/frozen or hot food was
                        transported at, if it was not used within 4 hours of entering the danger
                        zone.




       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Transporting food                                              67
                                                                                    Serving + Selling
                             Displaying food and
                             customers serving themselves


                  What do you need to know?
                  • Food on display can become contaminated by sick people or dirty clothing.
                  • Your customers can bring bugs into your food business. Bad bugs can be
Know
                    transferred to foods through a sick person's faeces, vomit and other body
                    fluids (e.g. snot and blood).
                  • Poorly arranged self-serve displays can increase the risk of customers
                    transferring bugs to your food, (e.g. reaching across food).
                  • Do not display or sell food past its Use-By date.
                  • It is important that things that come into contact with food (e.g. utensils,
                    packaging) are clean and will not contaminate food.
                  • People can become sick from eating raw shellfish. If the shellfish you sell is
                    not safe to consume raw, then you need to inform your customers of this.
                  • If you are displaying live shellfish for sale then there are rules you need to
                    follow, these are outlined in the Do section below.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Ready-to-eat food for customer self-selection must be: (tick which you and
                    your staff use):
 Do
                         pre-wrapped before display, or
                         protected with sneeze guards and covers.
                  • If you are displaying hot food, you must follow the rules for 'Keeping food
                    hot' [orange card]. If you are displaying cold food, you must follow the rules
                    for 'Keeping food cold' [green card].
                  • Always provide clean serving utensils. Utensil handles must not touch the food.
                    Replace utensils when dirty (e.g. customer drops spoon on the floor) or the
                    batch or dish changes.
                  • Have dedicated serving utensils for foods that contain the allergens listed in
                    the Know in the 'Separating food' [green] card and foods that do not contain
                    those allergens.
                  • Regularly check that food on display for customers to serve themselves is
                    within its Use-By date.
                  • If you have a live shellfish display unit then you must:
                       ◦ operate it following the manufacturer's instructions,

       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Displaying food and customers serving themselves                    68
                                                                                    Serving + Selling


                       ◦ maintain a salinity of 3.3% (this is a solution of 33g salt dissolved in 1L of
                         water),
                       ◦ regularly change the water to maintain water quality and remove foreign
Do                       matter (e.g. mud, stones, shells etc),
                       ◦ check that the temperature is no more than 10ºC.
                       ◦ remove any dead or broken shellfish.
                  • If your customers need to cook the shellfish before consuming, then you
                    must inform them of this. Follow the rules in the the 'Packaging and
                    labelling your food' [orange] card for more information'
                       ◦


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show                  ◦ how you and your staff make sure that the food customers can serve
                        themselves is safe (e.g. checking Use-By dates, following keeping food
                        hot or cold requirements),
                      ◦ how you and your staff prevent the food that customers can serve
                        themselves from becoming contaminated.
                      ◦ how you and your staff check and maintain the live shellfish display.
                      ◦ how you ensure customers are made aware of raw shellfish that is not
                        safe to consume before cooking.




       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Displaying food and customers serving themselves                    69
                                                                                Serving + Selling
                             Knowing what is in
                             your food


                  What do you need to know?
                  • You and your staff need to know, and be able to tell your customers what’s in
                    their food so they can make informed choices. This is especially important for
Know
                    people with food allergies.
                  • You and your staff need to know what is in the ingredients you use and food
                    you sell, to accurately tell customers.
                  • There are a number of common food allergens you need to know about.
                    These are: peanuts, crustacea, molluscs, fish, milk, egg, gluten, wheat,
                    soy, sesame, lupin, sulphites, almonds, Brazil nuts, cashews, hazelnuts,
                    macadamias, pecans, pine nuts, pistachios, walnuts.
                  • You and your staff need to know the required allergen name to describe the
                    allergens in your food from the list above.
                  • Food allergies can result in life-threatening reactions that can occur within
                    minutes of eating the food. Know which foods you sell that can cause allergic
                    reactions.
                  • If you change an ingredient or supplier (e.g. change the brand of ingredient),
                    then you will need to check the ingredients and make sure that there are no
                    new or additional allergens.
                  • MPI has developed a guide to help you understand the
                    rules on allergen declarations. Follow www.mpi.govt.nz/
                    dmsdocument/50725-Allergen-labelling-Knowing-whats-in-your-
                    food-and-how-to-label-it
                  • There are rules in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards
                    Code (the Code) about the types of food additives (e.g. preservatives) you can
                    add to some foods. If you use food additives, check the Code (part 1.3) or ask
                    your verifier for more information.
                  • There are composition rules in the Code that only apply to some foods you may
                    make (e.g. sausages, meat pies etc.). Check the Code or ask your verifier for
                    more information.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Check the labels of your ingredients. You must be able to understand them.
 Do
                  • Keep details of the ingredients you use, (e.g. record and follow your recipes)
                    so you know what allergens and permitted food additives they contain.

       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Knowing what is in your food                                    70
                                                                                 Serving + Selling


                  • Tell your staff which foods contain any of the allergens listed in the Know.
                    They must know how important it is that they are aware of allergies and
                    allergens.
 Do               • Either the day-to-day manager or delegated person's name/position:
                    ___________________________ (tick as appropriate) must be able to talk
                    to customers about what's in their food.
                  • You and your staff must check all of the ingredients in food, as well as sauces,
                    garnishes served with, or added to food so you know which ones contain
                    allergens.
                  • Check additive requirements in the Code if you use food additives (e.g.
                    preservatives) to make your foods and make sure the food additives you use
                    do no exceed limits in the Code.
                  • Check composition requirements in the Code are met (if applicable).


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier how you know what is in the ingredients you use.
Show              • Your verifier may ask staff to tell them which foods contain allergens.
                  • Your recipes to show how you meet additive and composition rules if they
                    apply to you.




       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Knowing what is in your food                                     71
                                                                              Serving + Selling
                             Packaging and
                             labelling your food


                  What do you need to know?
                  • Not all foods have to be labelled, but for those that do, the labels need to
                    meet the rules in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code (the Code).
Know
                  • You do not have to label your food if your food is:
                      ◦ not packaged,
                      ◦ made, packaged and sold in the same premises,
                      ◦ packaged in front of your customer,
                      ◦ whole or fresh cut fruit and vegetables (except for if you sell seed
                        sprouts),
                      ◦ ready-to-eat food which is delivered to your business already packaged
                        and ready to sell as is,
                      ◦ sold at a fundraising event,
                      ◦ displayed in a service cabinet which your customer does not have access
                        to.
                  • Even if your food does not have to be labelled you need to be able to tell
                    your customers or display close to the food:
                      ◦ what’s in the food,
                      ◦ any warning statements (need to be displayed), advisory statements and
                        allergy declarations.
                      ◦ if the food is made from or contains irradiated food (need to be
                        displayed) or genetically modified ingredients.
                  • Food that is made in one premises and packaged in another premises need
                    to be labelled.
                  • MPI has developed guides to help you create your food labels.
                    These can be found here: www.mpi.govt.nz/food-business/
                    labelling-composition-food-drinks/documents/
                  • Some food can become unsafe over time, even though it still
                    might look, smell and taste OK. It is important to let your customer know
                    when to eat your food by, by calculating the shelf-life and providing a Best
                    Before, Use-By or Baked On/Baked For date (this applies to bread only). You
                    need to make sure you calculate this date correctly.



       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Packaging and labelling your food                            72
                                                                                   Serving + Selling


                  Why calculate the shelf-life of a food?
                  • If your food is not being served for immediate consumption, and it could
                    become unsafe over time, you might need to work out the shelf-life of a food
Know                so that you can apply a date mark.
                  • There is a guide to help you work out shelf-life. Follow ‘How
                    to determine the shelf-life of food’ www.mpi.govt.nz/
                    dmsdocument/12540-How-to-determine-the-shelf-life-of-food-
                    Guidance-document
                  • Unsafe and/or unsuitable packaging can make your food unsafe.
                    You need to know that the packaging you use is suitable for use with food so
                    it keeps your product safe.

                  Why is labelling important?
                  • Labels allow your customers to make good and safe choices. They also tell
                    your customers how to store, use food, and when it needs to be used by (if
                    applicable).
                  • Some of your customers may have medical conditions (e.g. allergies) which
                    require them to include or avoid certain foods in their diet.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • If your food must be labelled you must include:
 Do
                       ◦ name of the food,
                       ◦ lot/batch identification,
                       ◦ name and address of your New Zealand or Australian business,
                       ◦ any applicable advisory statements, warning statements and allergen
                         declarations,
                       ◦ conditions for storage and use,
                       ◦ ingredients list,
                       ◦ date marking (e.g. Use-By, Best Before etc.),
                       ◦ nutrition information panel,
                       ◦ information about nutrition, health and related claims (only if you've made a
                         claim),
                       ◦ information about characterising ingredients and components,
                       ◦ if the product is or has been made with genetically
                          modified foods or irradiated foods .
                  • Keep details of the ingredients you use in your food.



       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Packaging and labelling your food                                  73
                                                                               Serving + Selling


                  • Label your foods correctly, for your staff and for your
                    customers (e.g the date the food needs to be used by).
                  • Use food safe packaging and packaging accessories (e.g. clips) to keep bugs
 Do                 and allergens out of food.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show                  ◦ how you and your staff know what information to include on your food
                        labels,
                      ◦ your food labels.
                  • Your verifier might ask you how you calculated the shelf-life of your food.




       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Packaging and labelling your food                                74
                                                                                   Serving + Selling
                              Selling your food to
                              other businesses


                  What do you need to know?
                  • You can only sell food you've made to another business if:
Know                   ◦ it does not change the main purpose of what you do (i.e. sell your food
                         direct to consumers), and
                       ◦ you do not have to change anything about your food (e.g. change the
                         way you package or label it).
                       ◦ Any businesses that you supply can only sell your food direct to their
                         consumers, and not to other businesses. Examples of people that can use
                         this plan include bakers who sell pies, cakes, slices etc. to café’s or retail
                         butchers providing sausages/steaks etc. to restaurants.
                  • When your food leaves your premises, you can no longer keep it safe and
                    suitable – you rely on others to do this for you.
                  • You need to know the names and contact details of any businesses you
                    regularly supply so you can recall any food if there is any problem.
                  • Anyone who consumes your food needs to know what is in it. If you are
                    supplying other businesses that sell your food, you need to provide them
                    with enough information so that they can answer any questions about what’s
                    in your food.
                  • If you find you are mostly making food to sell to other businesses, you might
                    be using the wrong plan. Contact MPI (foodactinfo@mpi.govt.nz) for help.
                  • If you want to supply your products to another business in packaging they
                    specify (e.g. with their branding) instead of the current way you sell it, you
                    cannot use this plan. Contact MPI (foodactinfo@mpi.govt.nz) for help.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • If you supply another food business, then you must keep details of:
 Do                    ◦ any businesses that you knowingly supply food to,
                       ◦ the product(s) you have supplied them,
                       ◦ the amount you have supplied them,
                       ◦ the date you supplied them.
                  • You must provide all food businesses that sell your food enough information
                    so that they can answer any questions about what’s in your food. Follow the


       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Selling your food to other businesses                              75
                                                                               Serving + Selling

                    'Packaging and labelling your food' [orange] and 'Knowing what is in your
                    food' [orange] cards.
                  • You must tell any business that you supply how to keep your food safe, and
 Do                 how long it can be kept before being used or thrown out.
                  • You must not change the way you package or label food from the way you do
                    for your own consumers, even if a business you are supplying requests it. If
                    you do, you must change your business registration.
                  • If you discover something wrong with your food that you supplied to a
                    business, you must follow the ‘Recalling your food’ [red] and ‘When
                    something goes wrong’ [red] cards.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier a record of the details you recorded in the Do section.
Show              • Show or explain to your verifier:
                      ◦ how you know that any business you supply food to only sells it direct to
                        their consumer,
                      ◦ how any food you supply to other businesses is packaged and (if
                        applicable) labelled.




       Orange Card / S39-00005 / Selling your food to other businesses                          76
                 v e r i fi e r
            ur                w                                                             Closing
       Yo
                                  ill c
       e·                          h eck   Cleaning up and closing
         m
                              hi
                                  t
            s e v e r y ti




                        What do you need to know?
                        • Bugs will grow on dirty surfaces and equipment (e.g. extraction fans, door
                          handles, brooms etc) and could be transferred to your food, making your
Know                      customers sick.
                        • Cleaning and sanitising are different. You cannot sanitise unless you have
                          cleaned first.
                            ◦ Cleaning removes dirt, grease and most bugs from surfaces.
                            ◦ Sanitising kills harmful bugs left on clean surfaces.
                        • Removing rubbish reduces the risk of people/clothing becoming
                          contaminated, your food becoming contaminated and attracting pests.
                        • You and your staff need to use clean water for cleaning.
                        • Food contact surfaces and equipment need to be cleaned every day that they
                          are used. If food contact surfaces are not used for a few days or from season
                          to season, they should be cleaned before they are used again to remove dust
                          and dirt that has settled in between use.
                        • Using disposable cleaning cloths or washing cleaning cloths after each use is
                          recommended.
                        • You and your staff need to make sure your food is still safe and suitable at the
                          end of the day. Anything that is not, will need to be appropriately dealt with.

                        Why is cleaning and sanitising important?
                        • Dirt and bugs could be transferred to food through dirty food surfaces, it is
                          therefore important that these are kept clean.
                        • Cleaning does not remove all bugs, so you will need to sanitise food surfaces
                          to kill any bugs that are left behind after cleaning.
                        • Sanitisers do not work properly on unclean surfaces, so you need to clean
                          before sanitising.
                        • Dirty premises can attract pests like mice, rats and cockroaches which can
                          spread disease.




       Purple Card / S39-00005 / Cleaning up and closing                                               77
                                                                                     Closing


                  What do you need to do?
                  Check your food at the end of the day
 Do               • Throw out any stock that has reached its Use-By date.
                  • For any food that has been kept hot on display, follow the 'Keeping food hot'
                    [orange] card).
                  • Throw out any food or ingredients that have been contaminated.
                  • Throw out any leftover marinades or coatings.
                  • Throw out any leftover brining or pickling solutions.
                  • Throw out any food which has come into contact with unclean water.
                  • All remaining food which is safe to be used later, must be labelled and stored
                    properly (e.g. cold food is in the fridge, food is protected from contamination
                    (i.e. in containers).
                  Cleaning up your food preparation area
                  • Dirt and bugs could be transferred to food through dirty food surfaces, it is
                    therefore important that these are kept clean.
                  • Empty bins and remove rubbish from processing areas at the end of the day
                    and when full.
                  • Dispose of rubbish regularly.
                  • Clean bins and rubbish area regularly.
                  • You and your staff must clean and sanitise all surfaces that come into contact
                    with food.
                  • You and your staff must use hot soapy water or suitable cleaning chemicals
                    (e.g. food grade).
                  • Always follow the manufacturer instructions when using chemicals.
                  • You and your staff must use clean water for cleaning your food preparation
                    areas and equipment and for rinsing-off hot soapy water and cleaning
                    chemicals.
                  • Sort and/or wash dirty laundry (if you choose to supply your staff with clean
                    clothing).


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show                  ◦ your ‘end-of-day’ routines including stock control,
                      ◦ your cleaning procedures and how you know surfaces and equipment
                        have been cleaned and sanitised,
                      ◦ how you and your staff remove waste,


       Purple Card / S39-00005 / Cleaning up and closing                                         78
                                                                                    Closing


                       ◦ how you and your staff clean your bins and rubbish area, and who is
                         responsible,
                       ◦ that your premises and equipment is clean and that laundry is being
Show                     done when necessary,
                       ◦ how you and your staff clean and sanitise your food preparation areas
                         and equipment,
                       ◦ how you and your staff use chemicals safely.




       Purple Card / S39-00005 / Cleaning up and closing                                         79
                                                                                     Closing
                              Maintaining equipment
                              and facilities


                  What do you need to know?
                  • If your premises and equipment are not designed for food use, are not in
                    good condition and/or do not work properly you may make unsafe and/or
Know
                    unsuitable food.
                  • Broken equipment and an unkempt building (e.g. holes in floors and walls) can
                    allow pests and bugs in your food. This can lead to unsafe and unsuitable food.
                  • The water you use for food preparation, hand washing and cleaning must
                    always be clean. You need to regularly check and maintain water pipes, tanks
                    and water treatment systems.

                  Why is maintaining your equipment and facilities important?
                  • Regularly maintaining facilities and equipment is important to prevent
                    something going wrong.
                  • A common way that bugs or other harmful things (e.g. chemicals, bits of glass
                    or metal etc.) get into food is from things breaking, breaking down or getting
                    damaged. Bugs especially like to hide and grow in cracks, crevices or holes,
                    and if they find a hiding space where food is stored, prepared, or handled,
                    they often get into food and make it unsafe.
                  • Equipment (e.g. chillers, freezers) might become inefficient or break down
                    allowing temperatures to rise and allowing bugs to grow in food stored there.
                  • Sometimes it is the things you cannot see (e.g. water pipes) or do not see
                    all the time (e.g. the inside of some equipment) that break down or become
                    dirty/contaminated resulting in unsafe or unsuitable food. It is important to
                    remember to sometimes check the things not in plain view.
                  • Measuring equipment (e.g. thermometers) can become less accurate over
                    time. You need to know that your equipment is taking accurate temperature
                    readings so you know that bugs are not able to grow in your food.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • Check your premises for signs of deterioration (e.g. holes in floors and walls)
                    and fix as necessary.
 Do
                  • Check any new or existing equipment for signs of deterioration and fix as
                    required.
                  • Service your equipment regularly and if necessary calibrate according to your

       Purple Card / S39-00005 / Maintaining equipment and facilities                            80
                                                                                  Closing


                  calibration schedule (e.g. thermometer, pH meter etc.).
                • Maintenance compounds and chemicals must:
                    ◦ be fully labelled, stored, sealed and used following the manufacturer’s
Do                     instructions,
                    ◦ be stored and transported in containers that are clearly different from
                       food containers.

                For all water supplies
                • Water pipes must work properly to stop animals, birds, dirt and waste from
                  contaminating your water.
                • Always flush water pipes after:
                    ◦ repairs and maintenance,
                    ◦ after 7 days without use to remove stagnant water,
                • Keep water tanks:
                    ◦ Clean and in good condition to stop the build-up
                      of sediment, and
                    ◦ Covered to stop animals, birds and dirt form contaminating water.
                For surface or ground water supply only
                • You must install, operate and maintain the water treatment system following
                  the manufacturer’s instructions.
                • You must follow the manufacturer’s instructions for replacing and cleaning
                  filters.
                • Bores must be designed and maintained so they are protected from surface
                  contamination.

                For roof water supply only
                • Water must only be collected from clean roofs and gutters made from safe
                  materials (e.g. no lead based paints, bitumen, exposed timber or copper
                  gutters).
                • You must reduce the risk of contamination as much as possible. This includes:
                    ◦ putting screening gutters up, and
                    ◦ removing overhanging branches and vegetation, and
                    ◦ mounting aerials and satellite dishes away from water collection areas,
                      and
                    ◦ installing a first flush device (a device which diverts the first flush of
                      water when it rains).
                • You must install, operate and maintain the water treatment system (e.g.
                  replacing filters) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

     Purple Card / S39-00005 / Maintaining equipment and facilities                             81
                                                                                     Closing


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier:
Show                  ◦ what you and your staff do to check your premises and equipment are
                        designed for food use and are in good working order,
                      ◦ how often you do maintenance checks,
                      ◦ what you and your staff check for during maintenance checks,
                      ◦ a record of your regular maintenance tasks or repairs, who does them
                        and when,
                      ◦ how often you’ve inspected and maintained your water system and
                        tanks. Also record who did it and when.
                  • Your verifier will check that you and your staff are calibrating your equipment
                    as required.
                  For self-supplied water only (surface, ground or roof supply)
                  • Show how often you’ve inspected and maintained
                    (e.g. changed filters) your water treatment system.




       Purple Card / S39-00005 / Maintaining equipment and facilities                            82
                                                                               Troubleshooting
                           When something goes
                           wrong


                 What do you need to know?
                 • Things do not always go as expected. You must have
                   a way for dealing with things that go wrong in your plan.
Know
                 • You need to identify what went wrong, who was involved, how the problem
                   was fixed, and the steps you and your staff have taken to make sure the thing
                   that went wrong does not happen again.
                 • Food that is not eaten immediately (e.g. sauces, raw meat etc) may need to
                   be recalled if something has gone wrong when handling or making your food,
                   you will need to follow the ‘Recalling your food’ [red] card.
                 • You need to keep a record of when things go wrong. You must keep records
                   for at least 4 years.


                 What do you need to do?
                 • Take immediate action as soon as a problem affecting food safety and/or
                   suitability is identified. Record the action that you and your staff took.
 Do
                 • If something has gone wrong, identify where the problem started and how
                   many times it happened. Identify if something is missing from your plan.
                 • Use your records to look over the past week/few days. Determine if anything
                   has gone wrong in your plan,
                   for example:
                      ◦ fridge temperatures were too high,
                      ◦ there was a sign of pests,
                      ◦ received food was not at the correct temperature,
                      ◦ poultry was not cooked to at least 65°C for 15 minutes,
                      ◦ food was not reheated to above 75°C,
                      ◦ food was cooled too slowly,
                      ◦ food was transported at the incorrect temperature.
                 • Is the food you produced unsafe or unsuitable? Do you need to tell your
                   customers? What did you do with any unsafe or unsuitable food?
                 • Fix the problem yourself or tell the person responsible for that area about the
                   problem. You may need to seek expert help if you cannot fix it yourself.
                 • Take action to prevent the problem from happening again.

       Red Card / S39-00005 / When something goes wrong                                        83
                                                                               Troubleshooting


                 • Keep clear, accurate and complete records for at least 4 years.
                 • Notify your verifier if any of your food has become unsafe or unsuitable when
                   following any procedures in your plan.
 Do

                 What do you need to show?
                 • Show your verifier your records from times where things have gone wrong.
Show             • You must show your verifier a record of:
                     ◦ what the problem was,
                     ◦ what you and your staff did to immediately fix the problem,
                     ◦ what changes you and your staff made to stop the problem from
                       happening again,
                     ◦ how you and your staff kept food safe or made sure no unsafe and
                       unsuitable food was sold.




       Red Card / S39-00005 / When something goes wrong                                        84
                                                                                 Troubleshooting
                            Dealing with customer
                            complaints


                 What do you need to know?
                 • You must be able to identify if the complaint is about food safety, suitability
                   or quality.
Know
                 • Complaints about food safety and/or suitability relating to food you have
                   made or sold must be dealt with immediately.
                 • If the compliant affects food safety and/or suitability you may need to recall
                   it. Follow the rules in the the 'Recalling your food' [red] card.
                 • You must have someone responsible for dealing with customer complaints.


                 What do you need to do?
                 • Identify who is responsible for dealing with complaints (tick who is
                   responsible for your plan):
 Do
                        day-to-day manager or
                        delegated person's name and/or position: ___________________
                 • Identify if the complaint is about food safety, suitability or quality.
                 • If the complaint affects the food safety and/or suitability of a batch or
                   individual item/dish, you must:
                      ◦ separate until proven to be safe or throw out affected food and
                        associated ingredients,
                      ◦ check food that has been in the same area or has been prepared at the
                        same time,
                      ◦ identify where the problem started,
                      ◦ fix the problem,
                      ◦ take action to prevent the problem from happening again.
                 • Notify your verifier:
                      ◦ if someone who eats your food ends up sick, or
                      ◦ could end up sick if they eat your food.


                 What do you need to show?
                 • Show your verifier a record of all of the following if
                   the complaint is about food safety or suitability:
Show

       Red Card / S39-00005 / Dealing with customer complaints                                   85
                                                                              Troubleshooting


                      ◦ the contact details of the person who made the complaint,
                      ◦ the date and time of the purchase,
                      ◦ your food that was affected including the batch/lot ID,
Show
                      ◦ what the complaint was about,
                      ◦ the cause of the problem,
                      ◦ the action you and your staff took immediately and the action you and
                        your staff took to prevent it from happening again.




       Red Card / S39-00005 / Dealing with customer complaints                                  86
                                                                                 Troubleshooting

                             Tracing your food



                  What do you need to know?
                  • Tracing means you need to be able to identify and trace food you sell, back to
                    a supplier, and find where it is in your business.
Know
                  • If you sell food to another business, you will need to be able to trace the food
                    you have supplied them with.
                  • You and your staff will need to trace your food and ingredients if a product
                    you have made and sold becomes unsafe or unsuitable.
                  • You have 2 options for tracing your food:
                     1 record all information about your product, so that it can be fully traced
                         and recalled (if necessary) or
                     2 only record the minimum amount of information required, so that you
                         can recall all food if there is a problem.
                  • Your staff must know how to follow the plan (i.e. recording the information
                    above), and where to look for this information.
                  • Option 2 could be expensive as if there’s a food safety problem, you would
                    have to recall or dispose of all foods produced in your premises which may
                    have been affected.
                  • For more information on recalling your food, follow the rules in the the
                    'Recalling your food' [red] card.
                  • There is specific information you must keep about foods you import.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • For all food choose either (tick what you will do):
 Do
                         Option 1: record all information to enable targeted recall, or
                         Option 2: record minimum information and recall all food that might be
                         affected.
                  • If you choose Option 1:
                       ◦ you must have a written plan to be able to trace your food, ingredients
                         and/or inputs, and recall it if there’s a food safety problem with either
                         your food, and/or any of the ingredients in your food, and
                       ◦ you must keep records including supplier details, brand and batch ID's,
                         Best Before and Use-By dates (if required).


       Red Card / S39-00005 / Tracing your food                                                  87
                                                                                 Troubleshooting

                  • If you choose Option 2:
                       ◦ you must record the following information:
                           • the name and contact details of your supplier,
 Do
                           • the type and quantity of food,
                           • the temperature of the food (only if it needs to be kept at a certain
                             temperature to keep it safe and suitable), and
                           • recall or dispose of all food which may have been affected.
                  • If you import food you must keep the following records:
                       ◦ the name and contact details of:
                           • your supplier,
                           • the manufacturer of the food,
                       ◦ a description of the food including commodity, brand and lot or batch
                         identification,
                       ◦ any information which will allow food to be traced:
                           • from the supplier to the registered importer,
                           • while it is under the registered importer’s possession,
                           • to the next person the food is passed onto
                             (other than the final consumer).


                  What do you need to show?
                  • A record of all information outlined in the Do if you are
                    importing food.
Show
                  • If you choose option 1, a record of all batch/lot identification information.
                  • If you choose option 2, a record of the minimum information is required.




       Red Card / S39-00005 / Tracing your food                                                      88
                                                                                  Troubleshooting

                             Recalling your food



                  What do you need to know?
                  • Food that is unsafe or unsuitable can make people sick.
Know
                  • If something has gone wrong with your food product, you may need to recall
                    it.
                  • There are 2 kinds of recall:
                     1◦ Consumer level – which involves removing affected product from the
                          supply chain and communicating to consumers; or
                     2◦ Trade level – which involves removing affected product from the supply
                          chain.
                  • There can be 2 reasons for recalls:
                        ◦ your supplier may need to recall:
                          1◦ a food product or packaging you use, or
                          2◦ you may need to recall the food you have made from your customers
                              because something caused your food to become unsafe or
                              unsuitable.
                  • You do not need to recall food if it has been eaten immediately (e.g. a hot
                    pie from a bakery or a meal served in a cafe). If there is a safety or suitability
                    issue, then the food should be removed from sale and discarded or set aside
                    and clearly labelled not for consumption.
                  • The records you keep will help you in the event of a recall.
                  • There is helpful information about recalling food on the MPI
                    website: www.mpi.govt.nz/food-business/food-recalls/food-
                    recall-guidance-for-businesses/
                  • Helpful information about conducting a simulated (mock) food
                    recall can be found here: www.mpi.govt.nz/food-business/food-
                    recalls/doing-food-recall/
                  Why is it important to have good records and a recall
                  procedure?
                  • Keeping good records means a recall can be conducted faster and more
                    efficiently, minimising cost and impact on your reputation.




       Red Card / S39-00005 / Recalling your food                                                   89
                                                                                Troubleshooting


                What do you need to do?
                • If you and your staff have become aware that food you have at your business
                  has been recalled by the supplier, you must:
Do
                     ◦ be able to identify if your food has been affected,
                     ◦ identify if the recalled food is on display, in storage, or has been used as
                       an ingredient in another food,
                     ◦ identify if the recalled food is being used in your business,
                     ◦ separate any recalled food and label it as ‘HOLD - do not use’,
                     ◦ tell your supplier how much of their affected product is at your food
                       business,
                     ◦ arrange for affected product to be picked up and/or disposed of.
                • If you and your staff have made and sold food which is unsafe or unsuitable,
                  you must do all of the following:
                     ◦ Gather information, understand the problem.
                     ◦ Identify which products and batches are (or might be) affected.
                     ◦ Identify where the affected products are.
                     ◦ Put affected products on hold.
                     ◦ Inform your verifier of the problem, or call 0800 00 83 33 and ask to
                       speak to a Food Coordinator, or email Food.Recalls@mpi.govt.nz.
                     ◦ Carry out a risk assessment. Decide on an action. Complete the Food
                       Recall Risk Assessment Form (found here: https://www.mpi.govt.nz/
                       food-business/food-recalls/food-recall-documents/) and email it to New
                       Zealand Food Safety (NZFS) Food.Recalls@mpi.govt.nz.
                     ◦ You must report to NZFS your decision to recall within 24 hours, email
                       your risk assessment to Food.Recalls@mpi.govt.nz or call 0800 00 83 33
                       and ask to speak to a Food Coordinator.
                     ◦ Prepare and distribute a point-of-sale Notice (consumer level recall).
                     ◦ Communicate to businesses that have received your product (consumer
                       and trade).
                     ◦ Communicate to consumers.
                     ◦ Check how much product was returned.
                     ◦ Review and identify corrective/preventative actions.
                     ◦ Inform an NZFS Food Compliance Officer how the recall went.
                • Simulated or mock recall: As of 1 July 2023, you must test your recall
                  procedures using a likely scenario, once every 12 months.




     Red Card / S39-00005 / Recalling your food                                                  90
                                                                                Troubleshooting


                  • Review the effectiveness of the simulated recall and identify any areas for
                    improvement.
                  • If you have completed a real recall in the 12 months and it was effective, then
 Do                 you are not required to complete a simulated or mock recall.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • If a supplier's food has been recalled, you must show your verifier a record
                    of:
Show
                       ◦ the action you and your staff took to remove that food from your
                         business.
                  • If your food needs to be recalled, you must show your verifier a record of:
                       ◦ the action you and your staff took to remove that food from your
                         business,
                       ◦ a completed Food Recall Risk Assessment Form,
                       ◦ a copy of the recall notice.
                  • From 1st July 2023, your annual simulated (mock) recall, if you have food that
                    could be recalled (e.g. baking, frozen meat etc.).




       Red Card / S39-00005 / Recalling your food                                               91
                                                                                      Specialist

                             Making sushi



                  What do you need to know?
                  • You can make sushi with acidified or non-acidified
                    rice. Sushi made with non-acidified rice cannot be
Know                kept for as long as sushi made with acidified rice.
                  • Adding vinegar solution to rice makes it acidic.
                    Harmful bugs cannot grow as well in acidified rice.
                  • You and your staff must get the pH of your rice right so you do not harm
                    your customers (i.e. if rice is too acidic (pH less than 3.0) you could burn
                    someone’s throat, if it is not acidic enough (i.e. more than 4.3, bad bugs can
                    grow).
                  • Brown rice cannot be acidified because the hard surface coating on the grain
                    stops the vinegar solution from soaking in.
                  • There are rules about how long sushi can be left outside of temperature
                    control (between 5°C to 60°C ). The 2-hour/4-hour rule does not apply to
                    sushi made from acidified rice.

                  Why there is a difference in sushi display times:
                  • Wrapping acidified rice around an ingredient (e.g. nori roll) reduces the
                    food surface exposed to bugs. Ingredients on top of acidified rice (e.g. nigiri)
                    are more exposed to bugs and therefore cannot be displayed for the same
                    amount of time.
                  • Ingredients used for making sushi (e.g. chicken) must be prepared, and
                    stored, as per their specific requirements (e.g. chicken must be cooked
                    following the'Cooking poultry, minced meat and liver' [magenta] and
                    'Cooling freshly cooked food' [magenta] cards).


                  What do you need to do?

                  Making non-acidified rice using white or brown rice
 Do
                  • Follow the ‘Cooling freshly cooked food’ [magenta] card to cool cooked rice.
                  • Do not keep sushi and/or onigiri above 5°C for more than 4 hours.




       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making sushi                                                        92
                                                                                    Specialist


                  Making acidified rice
                  • You must only acidify white rice.
                  • Make and add a vinegar solution to your rice as soon as it is cooked. You must
 Do
                    record the amount of vinegar solution you use.
                  • 30 minutes after acidifying your rice you must test the pH by mixing 1 part
                    clean water with 3 parts acidified rice (e.g. ¼ cup clean water mixed with ¾
                    cup rice with vinegar).
                  • Test the pH of your acidified rice mixture using a calibrated pH meter.
                  • Each batch of rice must have a pH of between 3.0 and 4.3.
                  • You and your staff must test each batch of rice you acidify, unless you can
                    prove your method of acidifying works every time. See the 'Proving the
                    method you use works every time' [magenta] card.
                  • You and your staff must cool acidified rice from 60°C to room temperature
                    or 21°C (whichever is colder) in 2 hours, and to 15°C or less within another 4
                    hours.
                  • You and your staff must store acidified rice that is ready to be used in sushi,
                    at temperatures between 5°C and 15°C for no more than 8 hours, after
                    which it must be thrown out.
                  • You and your staff must not mix leftover rice with freshly prepared rice.
                  Display sushi made with acidified rice safely
                  • You and your staff must store:
                      ◦ nigiri pieces between 5°C and 15°C for no more than 8 hours, or else
                         throw them out,
                      ◦ nori rolls between 5°C and 15°C for no more than 12 hours, or else throw
                         them out.
                  (The times above do not include the time during cooling when the rice is above
                  15°C. These times only start when the rice reaches 15°C or less.)

                  What do you need to show?
                  Show your verifier:
Show              • how you and your staff safely make sushi with non-acidified rice,
                  • how you and your staff safely make sushi with acidified rice including:
                      ◦ how you make your vinegar solution,
                      ◦ how you measure the pH of your rice,
                      ◦ a record of the pH measures of your rice,
                      ◦ a record of how you safely cool each batch of
                        acidified rice.

       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making sushi                                                      93
                                                                                  Specialist


                  • how you and your staff safely display sushi.
                  • If you can prove your acidifiying method works, show your verifier records
                    required from the 'Proving the method you use works every time'
Show                [magenta] card.


                      Freshly
                                                                  60°C
                      cooked




                                                       Room temperature
                                                       or 21°C (whichever
                                                       is colder)




                       Food placed in fridge




       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making sushi                                                      94
                                                                                   Specialist
                             Making Chinese style
                             roast duck


                  What do you need to know?
                  • Harmful bugs grow rapidly in the temperature danger zone, and this could
                    cause issues for Chinese style roast duck that is kept in the temperature
Know
                    danger zone for too long during processing and storage.
                  • Dipping the duck in boiling water will kill any bugs on the surface and
                    applying the vinegar stops bugs from growing while the duck is drying.
                  • If ducks are dried at room temperature for too long, bugs that produce
                    harmful toxins may grow and these toxins are not destroyed during roasting.
                  • Keeping the skin intact by minimising handling steps during preparation and
                    drying will help stop bugs from getting onto, and growing on, the meat.

                  What do I need to do?
                  Preparation
 Do               • Defrost frozen duck thoroughly and dry the skin if necessary.
                  • Dip the duck in boiling water containing vinegar and other ingredients (as
                    used in your recipe).
                      ◦ Note: If the water or marinade is going to be reused and has cooled down,
                        it must be re-boiled before the ducks are dipped into the mixture.

                  Drying
                  • You must:
                      ◦ not hang the duck to dry at above 5°C for more than 6 hours. If dried for
                        longer, the duck must be kept at or below 5°C,
                      ◦ check the temperature of the duck, with a calibrated thermometer, at the
                        start and half way through the drying process. The internal temperature
                        must not be more than 25°C,
                      ◦ move any ducks that have a core temperature higher than 25ºC during the
                        drying process to the chiller until the temperature drops below 25°C,
                      ◦ throw away any ducks that have been hung to dry for a period longer than
                        6 hours.
                  • You can use a calibrated infrared thermometer as an indicator of internal
                    temperature to prevent breaking the skin.


       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making Chinese style roast duck                                  95
                                                                                   Specialist


                  Cooking
                  • The duck must be thoroughly cooked during roasting. (see 'Cooking poultry,
                    minced meat and chicken livers' [magenta] card).
 Do
                  Display/storage
                  • Use the hanging hook to carry the duck after cooking to minimise touching
                    which will help keep the skin intact.
                  • You must ensure that the duck’s skin is not broken during display and storage.
                  • If the duck’s skin is broken, cut the meat up and keep it above 60°C until
                    served.
                  • Cooked ducks must be displayed or stored in a well ventilated, cool and dry
                    area to prevent moisture build up (i.e. not in an enclosed glass cabinet).
                  • Ducks must not touch each other or any other products on display or during
                    storage.
                  • If ducks have accidentally been in contact with each other for a long time,
                    you must cut them up and reheat the meat to 75°C. Then either:
                       ◦ keep the meat at or above 60°C until it is served, or
                       ◦ follow the 'Cooling freshly cooked food' [magenta] card to cool the
                         meat.
                  • Wrapped duck must not be on display for more than 5 hours.
                  • Remove and dispose of any duck that has been on display for more than 22
                    hours.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show your verifier a written record of:
Show                  ◦ the temperature of each duck at the time it was hung up to dry and the
                        time that drying started,
                      ◦ the temperature of the duck halfway through the drying process and
                        what you did to bring it down if it was higher than 25°C,
                      ◦ the time the duck was taken from the drying area to be cooked.




       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making Chinese style roast duck                                  96
                                                                                 Specialist

                            Making doner kebabs



                  What do you need to know?
                  • Raw doner kebab meat may contain bugs which can contaminate ready-to-
                    eat food.
Know
                  • You need to cook meat thoroughly to kill bugs.
                  • You can only slice meat from the doner kebab that has been thoroughly
                    cooked.


                  What do you need to do?
                  Preparing a kebab spit
 Do               • Only use fresh meat from a trusted supplier.
                  • Store meat below 5°C until needed.
                  • Prepare spits away from areas where salads, dips, sauces and cooked food is
                    kept.
                  • Only use thin cuts of meat when forming the spit.
                  • Protect prepared spits from dirt and other contamination.
                  • The length of the formed block of meat must not be longer than the length
                    of the burners.

                  Cooking and serving
                  • Doner kebab cooked on a vertical grill must be cooked before serving.
                  • The outside of the doner kebab must be thoroughly cooked before thin slices
                    of meat are shaved from the outside surface.
                  • Shaved meat must be collected before falling into the drip tray.
                  • Heating elements must be kept on and not turned down when the doner
                    kebab starts cooking.
                  • When minced meat spits are cooked from frozen, shaved meat must
                    undergo further cooking on a griddle/hot plate prior to use.
                  • Any shaved meat that has not been cooked thoroughly must be further
                    cooked by using a hotplate or grill.
                  • If the doner kebab has not been completely used at the end of service you
                    must:


       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making doner kebabs                                            97
                                                                                   Specialist


                      ◦ throw it away, or
                      ◦ carve off any partly cooked meat from the skewer. Cook thin slices on
                        the grill/hotplate. Cool the cooked shaved meat, cover it and store in the
 Do                     fridge. The next day it may be reheated and served.
                  • Cooked meat that remains on the spit must be cooled, follow the 'Cooling
                    freshly cooked food' [magenta] card.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show or describe to your verifier:
Show                  ◦ how you and your staff cool hot food quickly;
                      ◦ how you know the food you reheated was above 75°C,
                      ◦ how you and your staff keep food hot,
                      ◦ how you and your staff measure temperature.
                  • Show your verifier:
                      ◦ A written record of how you and your staff safely cooked the meat
                        including:
                          • the food,
                          • the date cooked.




       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making doner kebabs                                              98
                                                                                    Specialist

                             Cooking using sous vide



                  What do you need to know?
                  • The sous vide method means food will often be cooked at temperatures in
                    the danger zone (at or below 60°C). It is possible to do this safely – but only
Know
                    by managing this process very carefully. Mistakes can lead to people getting
                    sick or dying.
                  • Cooking foods at a lower temperature takes longer
                    to kill bugs.
                  • If the cooking temperature is too low, bugs cannot
                    be killed.
                  • Harmful bugs will survive and grow if you do not
                    follow the time and temperatures below.
                  • This process only applies to meat and poultry cuts.
                  • This process does not cover whole birds (e.g. chicken, duck), fish, cooking in
                    a sous vide oven, or cooking at temperatures below 55°C. If you wish to do
                    this, contact MPI (foodactinfo@mpi.govt.nz) for help.
                  • The vacuum seal must not be broken when taking the internal temperature
                    of the meat or poultry during cooking. Placing a strip of closed cell foam tape
                    on the outside of the bag, and sticking the temperature probe through this
                    will help stop any breakage.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • When preparing meat and poultry cuts to be sous vide, you and your staff
                    must:
 Do
                     ◦ keep raw and ready-to-eat foods separate
                       by either: (tick as appropriate)
                          • not using your vacuum sealer for ready-to-eat foods if it is used for
                            raw meat, or
                          • cleaning and sanitising your vacuum sealer between using it for
                            ready-to-eat foods,
                     ◦ cut meat and poultry pieces into equal portions
                       so they are the same size, weight and shape,
                     ◦ store vacuum sealed product prepared for sous vide in the fridge until it
                       is used.

       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Cooking using sous vide method                                    99
                                                                                   Specialist


                • When setting up your water bath, you and your staff must:
                     ◦ calibrate water baths at least monthly,
                     ◦ make sure water is always able to circulate freely,
Do
                     ◦ only use cooking equipment which has accurate and consistent
                       temperature control,
                     ◦ preheat your water bath to at least 55°C for red meat and 60°C for
                       poultry,
                     ◦ have good water circulation in your water bath,
                     ◦ change the water in the water bath after each batch.
                • When cooking using sous vide method, you and your staff must:
                     ◦ always completely submerge packs and make sure they are evenly
                       distributed,
                     ◦ record the water bath temperature regularly or
                       use an inbuilt data logger,
                     ◦ always keep the water bath temperature above 55°C when cooking red
                       meat and 60°C when cooking poultry at all times,
                     ◦ the meat or poultry must reach the temperature of the water bath within
                       4 hours, if it takes longer, it must be thrown out.
                     ◦ always test the temperature of the meat or poultry using a calibrated
                       needle probe thermometer at the thickest part of the meat or poultry,
                     ◦ always test the meat or poultry which has been in the coolest part of the
                       water bath,
                     ◦ check the temperature of the thickest part of the meat or poultry:
                         • at the start of cooking the batch, and
                         • before the start of the holding time, and
                         • at the end of cooking the batch,
                     ◦ check that the vacuum seal has not been broken after taking the
                       temperature,
                     ◦ always finish cooking one batch before adding chilled food to the water
                       bath.
                • Once meat and poultry has been cooked, you and your staff must keep it in
                  its bag until it is ready to be used and either:
                     ◦ serve it directly from the bag,
                     ◦ remove it from the bag, sear it (or cook it in some other way) and serve
                       immediately,
                     ◦ keep it in the bag, cool it quickly by following the 'Cooling freshly cooked
                       food' [magenta] card and store it below 5°C for up to 2 days (only if you
                       use the cook-serve method).
     Teal Card / S39-00005 / Cooking using sous vide method                                     100
                                                                                                     Specialist


                    ◦ keep it in the bag, cool it quickly and store it below 5°C for up to 5 days
                      (only if you use the cook-chill method).
                • You and your staff must label cooked food with the date and time it was
Do                made, the type of food it is, whether it is cook-serve or cook-chill, and throw
                  out date.

                You and your staff must only use the following time and temperature
                combinations: (the times below are holding times, they only start once your
                product has reached the required temperature).

                    Internal temperature and holding times
                    Internal food  Cook-serve: Serve immediately, or             Cook-Chill:
                    temperature    quickly chill and use within 2 days of        Serve
                    °C             cooking                                       immediately, or
                                                                                 quickly chill and
                                                                                 use within 5 days
                                                                                 of cooking
                                          All meats except    Poultry Time       Red meat and
                                          poultry Time        (Minutes/hours)    poultry Time
                                          (Minutes/hours)                        (Minutes/hours)

                                     55   420 mins / 7 hrs    Poultry must not   If storing sous
                                                              be sous vide at    vide red meat

                Temperature danger
                                     56   296 mins /
                                          4 hrs 56 mins       temperatures       or poultry for
                                                              lower than 60°C    longer than
                                     57   208 mins /
                                                                                 2 days, do
                                          3 hrs 28 mins

                      zone
                                                                                 not cook at
                                     58   147 mins /                             temperatures
                                          2 hrs 27 mins                          lower than 60°C
                                     59   104 mins /
                                          1 hr 44 mins
                    60                    73 mins / 1 hr 13   56 mins            91 mins /1 hr
                                          mins                                   31mins
                    61                    52 mins             40 mins            63 mins / 1hr
                                                                                 3mins
                    62                    36 mins             29 mins            44 mins
                    63                    26 mins             21 mins            30 mins
                    64                    18 mins             15 mins            21 mins
                    65                    13 mins             11 mins            15 mins
                    66                    9 mins              8 mins             10 mins
                    67                    7 mins              6 mins             7 mins

                The times above are the minimum holding times once a product has reached
                the indicated temperature.


     Teal Card / S39-00005 / Cooking using sous vide method                                                       101
                                                                                   Specialist


                  • If reheating whole cuts of red meat or poultry that has been cooked using
                    the sous vide method, reheat to above 55°C for red meat and above 60°C for
                    poultry before serving for immediate consumption. Any reheated leftover red
 Do                 meat or poultry which is not served or eaten immediately must be thrown out.

                  Proving your method
                  • If you do not want to take the temperature of every batch you cook, you can
                    prove your method of cooking works every time. See the ‘Proving the method
                    you use works every time’ [magenta] card.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • Show or tell your verifier:
Show                  ◦ how you and your staff calibrate water baths at least monthly,
                      ◦ record of:
                           • water bath temperatures before the food was added to the water,
                           • the time taken for the food to reach the selected internal temperature,
                           • the length of holding time once the food reached the selected food
                             temperature,
                           • internal temperature of the food at the start and the end of holding
                             time,
                           • cooling time (for products cooled and stored for later service).
                      ◦ If you can prove your sous vide cooking method works, show your verifier
                        records required from the 'Proving the method you use works every time'
                        [magenta] card.




       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Cooking using sous vide method                                   102
                              Preparing red meat for                                              Specialist

                              mincing and serving
                              lightly-cooked or raw


                  What do you need to know?
                  • This process only covers red meat – beef, lamb and venison. This process
                    does not cover pork, chicken, duck or livers.
Know
                  • This process only needs to be followed if you choose to serve red meat
                    lightly-cooked or raw.
                  • Bugs are found on the surface of whole cuts of meat. Mincing meat spreads
                    the bugs from the surface all the way through the meat.
                  • It only takes a few harmful bugs to make people sick.
                  • The only way to make meat safe to be served lightly-cooked or raw is to kill
                    the bugs on the surface of the meat before it is minced.
                  • There are 3 ways to reduce the number of bugs on the outside of meat – sear
                    it, blanch it or sanitise it.
                  • Bugs can be hidden under flaps, in cavities and between the seams of whole
                    cuts of meat. Make the outside of the meat smooth by removing any parts
                    which could stop the searing, blanching or sanitising solution from killing
                    bugs.
                  • All additional ingredients used with the sanitised red meat (e.g. seasonings,
                    binders etc.) must be safe and suitable for use.
                  • You and your staff do not need to follow the rules about cooking minced red
                    meat on the ‘Cooking poultry, minced meat and chicken liver’ [magenta]
                    card if you follow this procedure.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • You must choose one of the following methods:
 Do
                      ◦ searing, or
                      ◦ blanching, or
                      ◦ using sanitising solution.
                  • You and your staff must only use cuts of meat with a smooth surface. (e.g.
                    prime cuts like sirloin, rump, thick flank, silverside, topside).
                  • You and your staff must either:
                      ◦ trim any seams, obvious flaps and/or cavities before searing, blanching or
                        sanitising so the entire surface of the meat is evenly treated, or


       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Preparing red meat for mincing and serving lightly-cooked or raw                103
                                                                                                Specialist


                     ◦ cut or trim the meat into smaller portions (i.e. no flaps or cavities) before
                       searing, blanching or sanitising so the entire surface of the meat is evenly
                       treated.
Do
                Searing
                • When searing, all surfaces of the meat (including any fat layer) must come
                  into contact with the oiled hot plate, grill or pan.

                Blanching
                • When blanching, you can choose to blanch the meat either unwrapped or in
                  a vacuum-sealed bag. If you use a vacuum-sealed bag, all surfaces of the meat
                  must come into direct contact with the bag.
                • The meat must be fully covered by water or stock that is at a rolling boil, for at
                  least:
                    ◦ 30 seconds if it is not in a bag, or
                    ◦ 60 seconds if it is in a vacuum-sealed bag.

                For both searing and blanching
                • You and your staff must rapidly chill the seared or blanched meat
                  by either:
                    ◦ placing the meat in an ice slurry, or
                    ◦ putting the meat in the fridge, or
                    ◦ putting the meat in the freezer.

                Using sanitising solution
                • When sanitising, you must only use one of the following chemicals: (tick as
                  appropriate)
                      lactic acid
                       peroxyacetic acid (POAA)
                • You and your staff must not use a lower or higher concentration of sanitising
                  solution.
                • The whole piece of meat must always be fully covered by the sanitising
                  solution. All surfaces of the meat must come in direct contact with the
                  sanitising solution.
                • You and your staff must use a new sanitising solution for each piece of meat
                  you sanitise.




     Teal Card / S39-00005 / Preparing red meat for mincing and serving lightly-cooked or raw                104
                                                                                                  Specialist


                  Using lactic acid
                  • You and your staff must use a solution that is between 2—5%.
                  • You and your staff must dip the whole piece of meat in the solution for 9
 Do                 seconds. The solution must be used at 55°C.

                  Using POAA
                  • You and your staff must use a concentration of between 150—220 parts per
                    million.
                  • The concentration of hydrogen peroxide must be 75 parts per million or less
                    (note: if using pre-prepared concentrate, you do not need to do this).
                  • You and your staff must dip the whole piece of meat in the solution for 10—
                    15 seconds (no more than 30 seconds) at room temperature.

                  For all methods
                  • All meat that has been seared, blanched, or sanitised must be used within a
                    maximum of 48 hours.
                  • Formed patties must be used within 24 hours or frozen immediately for later
                    use.
                  • Thawed patties must be used within 24 hours.
                  • All seared, blanched, or sanitised meat must be stored at 5°C or less when
                    not being used or handled.


                  What do you need to show?
                  Show or describe to your verifier:
Show
                  • how the method you and your staff have chosen is followed exactly, every
                    time,
                  • how you and your staff kill the bugs on the outside of whole cuts of meat,
                  • how you and your staff handle the meat after it has been either seared,
                    blanched, or sanitised,
                  • how you and your staff ensure, blanched, seared or sanitised meat is used
                    within 48 hours,
                  • how you and your staff mince red meat safely and use the resulting patties
                    within 24 hours,
                  • how you and your staff mince red meat safely.




       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Preparing red meat for mincing and serving lightly-cooked or raw                105
                                                                                                  Specialist


                  Sanitising solution method
                  • Show or describe to your verifier:
                      ◦ how you and your staff prepare and apply the sanitising solution,
Show
                      ◦ how you and your staff know you have used the right:
                          • chemical, and
                          • concentration, and
                          • temperature, and
                          • amount of time to kill bugs.




       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Preparing red meat for mincing and serving lightly-cooked or raw                106
                                                                                    Specialist

                             Making biltong



                  What do you need to know?
                  • If you make other ready-to-eat dried meat products, such as
                    droëwors, that won’t be cooked, there will be processing steps
Know
                    that are not covered by this card. You will need a ‘custom’
                    food control plan for these products www.mpi.govt.nz/food-
                    business/running-a-food-business/food-control-plans/custom-
                    food-control-plans/create-custom-food-control-plan.
                  • You can only use this card if you are making biltong from Red Meat (beef,
                    lamb and venison).
                  • Meat must have originated from a registered premises operating
                    under a Risk Management Programme, and subject to national
                    microbial monitoring. This excludes micro abattoirs (who are not
                    subject to national microbial monitoring). Registered premises
                    can be found here: Register of Risk Management Programmes:
                    mpi.my.site.com/publicregister/s/RiskMeasureSearch.
                  • Scraps and trimmings left over from other processes in your business may be
                    contaminated and are not suitable for making biltong using this card.
                  • The quantities of vinegar and salt in the marinade act as hurdles to prevent
                    microbes growing on cut meat surfaces.
                  • Biltong needs to be dried to a level of water activity (aw) of less than 0.85.
                    This helps to ensure harmful bugs won’t grow or produce toxins in the dried
                    biltong.
                  • Because biltong isn’t cooked, it is particularly important to make sure your
                    processing environment and equipment is clean and you are washing your
                    hands as required.
                  • Your process needs to operate hygienically and consider factors that may
                    affect the rate of drying including:
                       ◦ thickness of the slices – the thicker the slices, the longer the centre of
                         the meat will take to dry.
                       ◦ hanging and arranging slices – making sure slices don’t touch each
                         other helps ensure even drying through the slice. Where slices touch,
                         bugs can grow.
                       ◦ air movement across meat surfaces – the faster the air speed, the
                         quicker moisture is removed from the surface of the meat.


       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making biltong                                                    107
                                                                                 Specialist


                      ◦ humidity – high air movement can cause case hardening. You can
                        increase humidity to prevent case hardening.
                      ◦ surface fat – can act as a water barrier slowing the rate at which the
Know                    meat under it dries.
                      ◦ differences in seasonal temperatures and conditions – you should
                        consider the environmental conditions you are making biltong in.
                        Seasonal temperatures differ between countries and regions. You may
                        choose to make biltong at dryer times of the year, or you might want to
                        control drying conditions using different equipment and/or settings.
                  • You must only use food additives that are permitted under the Australia New
                    Zealand Food Standards Code (the Code). You must also follow the rules in
                    the 'Knowing what is in your food' [orange] card.


                  What do you need to do?
                  • You must carry out checks each time you make biltong and record the results
                    to show how you know a batch of biltong has dried to below aw 0.85.
 Do
                  • You can check the water activity of each batch of biltong using one of the
                    three methods below. Tick which one you will use:
                        send biltong samples to a laboratory to test for aw or
                        use a water activity meter (used according to manufacturers’
                     instructions), or
                        use percentage (%) weight loss to calculate water activity.
                     If you choose this option you must use this procedure: www.
                     mpi.govt.nz/dmsdocument/70155.
                     Information in this card marked with the pencil icon identifies:
                       ◦ the checks you must do at each step in the process; and
                       ◦ the information you will need to provide (refer
                         to the record blank here: www.mpi.govt.nz/
                         dmsdocument/70156).
                  • The record blank (www.mpi.govt.nz/dmsdocument/70156) is a
                    way to show how your biltong meets the requirements of your
                    plan. You don't have to use this specific record blank, but you
                    must keep records of the information indicated in this card.

                  Sourcing
                  • You must follow the ‘Sourcing, receiving and storing your food’ [green] card
                    and ‘Tracing your food’ [red] card. You must also only use:
                      ◦ meat from a registered NZ meat processor (Register of Risk Management
                        Programmes), other than a micro-abattoir.

       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making biltong                                                 108
                                                                                 Specialist

                    ◦ fresh hindquarter meat, or hindquarter meat that was frozen when fresh.
                    ◦ herbs, spices and other ingredients that have been hygienically
                      produced.
Do                  ◦ meat kept chilled at or below 5°C until it is used.
                • Record confirmation from your meat supplier that meat ordered for
                  making biltong comes from an authorised abattoir in New Zealand with
                  Establishment Number(s) on the box or carcase.

                Preparing
                • Slice meat to the same, or very similar, thickness. You may use tempered
                  meat (thawing meat that is still partially frozen) for slicing.
                • As well as following requirements in your plan for 'Knowing what is in your
                  food' [orange] card, you must prepare the marinade and accurately measure
                  ingredients so that:
                     ◦ salt and vinegar are present in the minimum quantities per kg of meat
                       as identified in the following table, including when you use a commercial
                       biltong pre-mix.
                     ◦ biltong must only contain food additives that are allowed by the Code, in
                       a quantity permitted to be in the finished food product. See example in
                       the table below. See example in the table below.


                                Ingredient                    Quantity per kg of meat
                 Meat                                 1 kg
                 Vinegar                              Minimum weight 30 grams
                 Salt                                 Minimum weight 30 grams
                 Preservative (for example            Maximum Level (mg/kg) 50 (from the
                 potassium nitrite (249))             Code)

                • Ensure all meat surfaces are covered with the marinade, then marinate at or
                  below 5°C for at least 10 hours.
                • Record this:
                    ◦ the weight of meat used in the batch.
                    ◦ the weight and thickness of a representative sample (10 or more) of raw
                      meat slices from each batch of biltong. Number each slice before starting
                      the drying process. only if you use the % weight loss method.
                    ◦ your calculation for ensuring the levels of sodium or potassium nitrite
                      added (or any other permitted food additive) does not exceed levels
                      permitted in the dried biltong.

     Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making biltong                                                   109
                                                                                   Specialist


                     ◦ the amount of salt and vinegar (calculated using the total weight of
                       meat).
                     ◦ Note: If you use the same weight and thickness of meat, amounts of salt,
Do                     vinegar, and permitted additives each time, you do not need to write
                       them down each time.

                Drying, Storing and Handling
                • Dry meat slices in a dedicated space such as a drying room or cabinet
                  ensuring they are protected from contamination.
                • Hang marinated slices of meat using clean and sanitised hooks.
                • Hang slices in the drying space so they do not touch other pieces of meat,
                  walls, or equipment; and so air can circulate around each slice during drying.
                • Make sure that equipment used in the dedicated drying space:
                     ◦ is operated to dry meat evenly to prevent ‘case hardening’ (crusty outer,
                       wet centre).
                     ◦ is monitored throughout the drying time to ensure it operates as you
                       intend it to for drying the meat.
                     ◦ does not contaminate meat while drying.
                     ◦ is thoroughly cleaned between batches (for example, from meat ‘drip’).
                • At the end of the drying process biltong must have a water activity of below
                  aw 0.85. Check water activity using your chosen method.
                • Record this:
                     ◦ the air temperature for drying and any other settings of equipment you
                       use that are necessary for the process (i.e. settings you rely on each time
                       you make biltong).
                     ◦ the date and time the batch of marinated meat was hung in the dryer.
                     ◦ the date and time the batch of biltong finished drying.
                • If results from checking aw show the biltong is not below aw 0.85, you:
                     ◦ must dry the biltong for longer and retest until the batch is below aw
                       0.85.
                     ◦ must write down the actions you took with the batch of biltong until
                       you confirmed the aw was below aw 0.85 (for example, using the ‘Biltong
                       batch record’).
                     ◦ will need to review your drying process to find out why the aw of biltong
                       did not lower to less than aw 0.85. Then you will need to adjust your
                       process so it works as intended.
                • You must not sell biltong unless the aw is below 0.85.


     Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making biltong                                                     110
                                                                                     Specialist


                  • You must store and handle dried biltong hygienically under conditions that
                    keep the water activity below aw 0.85 throughout its shelf-life.

Do                Establishing shelf-life
                  • To provide accurate information to consumers about how long biltong will
                    be safe to eat once it has finished drying you will need to determine its shelf-
                    life. Follow the rules in the 'Packaging and labelling your food' [orange]
                    card to determine this.


                  What do you need to show?
                  • You will need to show or describe to your verifier how you:
Show                  ◦ know every batch is safe and suitable with an aw below 0.85.
                      ◦ ensure the process is hygienic and works as intended each time.
                      ◦ confirm meat is from NZ and from a registered premises.
                      ◦ how meat is sliced to an even thickness.
                      ◦ ensure the vinegar and salt to meat ratio is at least the minimum amount
                        required.
                      ◦ thoroughly marinate meat slices before starting the drying process.
                      ◦ know your drying process will consistently dry each batch of biltong.
                      ◦ store and display biltong to ensure it won’t absorb moisture.
                      ◦ know product shelf-life is accurate.




       Teal Card / S39-00005 / Making biltong                                                     111
